Press Briefing 1/22/09

Press Briefing by Press Secretary Robert Gibbs

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:40 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS:  How are you all?  Nice to be here. 
Q    How are you?
MR. GIBBS:  I'm great.  Before I take a few of your questions, let me start out by letting you know something that we've added each day to the President's daily schedule.  It's something that we're calling an Economic Daily Briefing that he'll receive most likely in the Oval Office each and every day.  It will be treated and prepared with the same sort of renowned professionalism that the Daily Intelligence Briefing is done with.  It is -- will be put together -- each night the President will receive a memo.  It will be updated in the morning.  The briefing will be led by NEC Director Larry Summers. 
This morning's daily briefing was attended by the President, the Vice President, the White House Chief of Staff, OMB Director Peter Orszag, obviously Larry Summers, Domestic Policy Director Melody Barnes, and Jared Bernstein, the Vice President's Chief Economic Advisor.  They walked through the day's economic news, the myriad of statistics that came out today on jobless claims and housing. 
The President asked that this be added each day to his schedule, as the country is in the midst of an economic crisis and an economic emergency.  And he felt it was important that each day he receive the most up-to-date information as it relates to the economy, as we put together an economic reinvestment and recovery plan, as well as future financial stability packages, to ensure that our economy gets moving again.
And with that, let me entertain a few questions.
Jennifer.
Q    Thanks, Robert.  I just want to try again to better understand how you guys are saying that you're not going to use any interrogation techniques that fall outside the Army Field Manual, or approve any of these techniques, and yet there's a task force that's going to look at whether those techniques provide an appropriate means of acquiring intelligence necessary.  Just, I'm still not quite clear on how --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, some of the technical questions obviously we had Greg help you guys understand a little bit of that, and we'll be happy to do that.  Let me step back from the process just a little bit, and describe in some detail what the President asked his team to do.  The President believes that there's no more important job that he has than to keep the American people safe, that everybody that works in this building and in this administration knows of his strong belief and understands its importance. 
The President believes that what he did today will enhance the security of the American people, that it lives up to our values as Americans, and that it will protect the men and women that we have in uniform.  This was done through long consultations, as Greg talked about with folks in and out of government. 
I don't want to get -- I don't want to prejudge the executive orders of the commission that's going to happen.  I know that as it relates to going forward, that everybody is under the Army Field Manual.  The commission has been tasked with studying any number of different scenarios relating to detainees and interrogation.  And I think what's best is to let that happen and see what happens when they come back.
Obviously, what started today was a process that the President committed to during the campaign and reiterated throughout the transition to close the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay.  That process started today with his signature.  That process will go on until the issues that were outlined are appropriately determined.
Q    It sounds like, though, what you all are saying is that the Army Field Manual is going to apply unless you decide maybe it shouldn't.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I don't want to prejudge the -- I don't want to prejudge a commission that's going to look at any number of different issues.  I think the President has been very clear on what he believes protects the American people and protects the values that we have as Americans.
Chip.
Q    Some Republicans on Capitol Hill are already complaining about the Guantanamo decision, saying that what's going to happen is you're going to have a lot of people transferred to countries overseas, they're going to be released for one reason or another, and they're going to go right back to waging war against American troops.  How can the President make certain that doesn't happen?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, before he signed the executive orders and the memoranda he met with -- and I think the list has been distributed -- generals and flag officers that have been involved in keeping our country safe for quite some time. 
I'm told that there was a special interaction in the room and a real palpable pride on behalf of these generals and flag officers that the decision that the President was making today with his signature made America safer, made America stronger, lived up to our values, and protected the men and women that those generals and flag officers have sent out to protect our freedom each and every day. 
He believes that with this we've made our security stronger.  We've done it in consultation with, as I said, members of current government, people that have been outside of government, people that have been involved in these decisions.  There are certainly going to be people that are going to come at this from one angle.  I think there are also a number of people that will come at it from the angle that the steps that were taken today ensure and enhance the security of the American people. 
Chuck.
Q    You said yesterday it was out of an abundance of caution that you did the re-swearing in.  Out of that same abundance of caution, has he re-signed the executive orders that he did yesterday?
MR. GIBBS:  No.  Let me step back and address this -- and I should call on Mark, as well, on this because he had emailed me a question about whether or not there had been discussion of doing this, and I emailed him in the afternoon and said there had not been a discussion. 
The Counsel's Office believed strongly throughout the day that the President had been sworn in appropriately and effectively.  Discussion later in the afternoon regarding the misplacement of a word, and because of that and out of an abundance of caution, Chief Justice Roberts came last night to readminister the oath.
I think in today's papers there are at least two examples in history where words have been misplaced in the oath, and again, out of an abundance of caution -- a similar abundance of caution -- the oath was readministered.
Q    So why not re-sign the executive order, out of that same abundance of caution?
MR. GIBBS:  Because the Counsel's Office continues to believe that the President was sworn in appropriately and effectively.
Q    Well, then, why did you do it if you don't -- I mean, that's what I'm just trying to -- if you don't feel like you needed to do it --
MR. GIBBS:  Right -- well, Chuck, I think you know lawyers, they -- (laughter) -- they --
Q    That's what I'm counting on Chip to be -- or Savannah -- (laughter.)
Q    I'm a lapsed lawyer.
MR. GIBBS:  I was going to say, I don't want to raise a -- no raising of hands as to who is.  They did not believe that there was a problem.  But out of an abundance of caution, to ensure that somebody didn't think there might ever be, that it was simply done again.  The Constitution, as Greg said in his statement, prescribes an oath.  A word was misplaced, and out of an abundance of caution, the Chief of Justice, over the course of a 25-second period of time and under the slow and careful instruction of the President, the oath was readministered.
Q    And in terms of transparency, why didn't you show the world this?
MR. GIBBS:  We did show the world this.
Q    Well, there was no --
MR. GIBBS:  I mean, I think as you --
Q    -- there's, like, crackling audio recordings of it, there's some stills.  No video.  You put your radio address on video.  I mean, you know, why not put it on video for everybody to see?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's be clear -- you just mentioned there's audio.  I've heard that audio.  I was there -- far easier to get tickets for this one.  We took a print pool in there, we released a photograph from the White House.  And as I think the pool reported, as soon as it happened we reported it out.  We think it was done in a way -- hold on -- we think it was done in a way that was up front and transparent.  We think that it -- also did it in a way that demonstrated, again, this was done out of an abundance of caution, and only that.
Yes, sir.
Q    Did the original concern about the oath-taking originate with the White House Counsel, or with the President?
MR. GIBBS:  My understanding is the White House Counsel.
Q    Did he have to persuade the President that it was the right thing to do?
MR. GIBBS:  No, because it was done, again, out of an abundance of caution.  It was not done -- (laughter) -- people usually don't laugh when I don't say something that's not altogether generally funny.  No, this was something that was determined, again, at the Counsel's Office, and the President was fine with that.
I think you guys read the pool report -- he seemed to -- he was in a pretty casual mood when he instructed the Chief Justice to do this more slowly and deliberate.
Jake.
Q    Back to the executive orders today, as you know, there are a lot of intelligence officials in the outgoing administration -- or the gone administration -- that disagree with both the decisions to rely on the Army Field Manual, as well as the decision to close Guantanamo Bay.  I'm wondering -- obviously members of the President's administration agree with him, and it looks like members of this interagency task force, as far as I can tell, agree with these decisions.  Who did the President talk to who disagreed with him, who made the argument, as the former President did and the former Vice President did, that actually relying on just the Army Field Manual and closing Guantanamo Bay puts the American people at risk?  And how can you be certain, considering that the interagency task force has not met yet, that these decisions are the right ones?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think based on the consultation -- I don't have a list; I can certainly look into something like that.  The President felt satisfied that the charge that he gave to his national security team was done in a broad enough way to ensure that any decision he made -- to reiterate what I said earlier -- that he understands his most important aspect -- the most important aspect of his job is to do everything humanly possible in his power to keep America safe.  He believes that the consultation was done in a way that was -- that structured the executive orders and the memoranda in a way that ensures that the American people are safe.
Q    On that point, Robert --
Q    Could I just follow up with that -- I'm sorry -- the current CIA Director disagrees about the Army Field Manual being sufficient.  What does the President and his team know that the current CIA Director doesn't know?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the current CIA Director has an opinion; I think the generals and flag officers that were in the room with the President prior to his signing of the executive orders have an opinion.  I think there have been varying opinions in any number of administrations.  The President's opinion, based on all that he heard and all that he saw, was that these executive orders lived up to the very high standard that he holds to do everything in his power to protect the American people.
Q    But how can you say the executive order on Guantanamo Bay, you can say clearly made America safer today, when it doesn't seem like you really have a plan yet about where the detainees are going to go?
MR. GIBBS:  Ed, one of the things -- I think one of the things that the commission, and one of the things that the executive orders does, is begin the process whereby the current administration can examine what exactly is going on and who exactly is there.  Those are, in some ways, records that have to be acquired, and that's what the commission will undertake, is a study to determine that.
Again, the process --
Q    You said there's a study -- go ahead, make your point.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the process -- again, this is not something that was done -- not done with one signature.  That's why I was careful in saying that the process by which this will undertake over the course of up to one year will determine, as Greg laid out, who's involved in which status of detainee, which group that they're involved in, and ultimately study how best to deal with them in a way that protects our country, protects our values, and administers justice.
Q    So these are terror suspects, and the American people are hearing Washington is going to study it, they're going to find out for a few more months, like, what are we going to do with these detainees?  So what do -- okay, but you've been talking about this for months and ---
MR. GIBBS:  We worked late last night, but we weren't that late.  (Laughter.)
Q    But he was talking about it on the campaign for months about Guantanamo Bay.
Q    Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday.
MR. GIBBS:  Depends on when he got sworn in, right? 
Q    Depends when he got sworn in.  (Laughter.) 
MR. GIBBS:  I wanted the record reflecting Chuck stole my line.  (Laughter.) 
Q    But the bottom line is that you've been talking about it -- the President talked about it on the campaign trail; people have studied this for a long time.  And you're now signing the executive order.  Have you got a plan for where the detainees will be?  What assurances can you give --
MR. GIBBS:  We signed an executive order to establish a plan for what happens.
Q    Well, what assurances can you give the American people that these detainees just won't wind up out on the streets, won't go back to their home countries and launch new terror attacks?
MR. GIBBS:  I can assure them that all of -- all of what you just enumerated will be undertaken and studied as part of a commission to look into these very complex, very detailed questions.  The President believes that he enhanced the security of the American people.  He understands that's his most important job, that justice has to be rendered, and that our values have to be upheld.  All of those are going to be determined as it relates to going forward in Guantanamo.
Q    One on the quick executive order on -- yesterday on lobbying.  The President said he was going to be closing the revolving door, and that basically anybody who had been a lobbyist, comes into his administration, they can't work on the issues they lobbied on.  You've got William Lynn, who is the nominee to be the Deputy Defense Secretary, who was a lobbyist for Raytheon, a major defense contractor.  How can the President say that he's preventing people from working in the areas where they lobbied when the number two at Defense was a Raytheon lobbyist?
MR. GIBBS:  The -- I think you saw in today's papers, you had experts that study the issue of transparency and ethics laud the steps that the President took yesterday to end gifts, to end lobbying, to strengthen ethics and openness -- that that exceeds what any administration has previously done in the history of this country.  That's what the President pledged in his campaign, and that's exactly what he did yesterday in signing these executive orders.
Those very same experts that lauded the greatest ethical standard ever administered to an executive branch also believe, as the President does, that any standard is not perfect, that a waiver process that allows people to serve their country is necessary.  In the case of Mr. Lynn, he's somebody who obviously is superbly qualified.  His experience going back to his Pentagon jobs during the Clinton administration make him uniquely qualified to do this. 
The President believes that, as these experts do, that a very limited numbers of waivers --
Q    But he's not really closing the revolving door, though.
MR. GIBBS:  No, I -- any of the people that work here, and myself, are prohibited, as the executive order states, from walking --
Q    But Deputy Defense Secretary is a pretty big job.  We're at war in two countries right now.  So he's a lobbyist, and now he's going to be Deputy Defense Secretary.
MR. GIBBS:  Right.  And if he ever leaves this administration, he'll never, as the President said, be able to lobby this administration as it relates to the work that it does for the length or entirety of that administration.
Again, what the President did yesterday was institute the strongest ethical and transparency guidelines that any administration has lived under in the history of the country.
Major.
Q    Two questions, Robert -- one on the executive orders and one on the economy.  Just so the American people have an understanding, if, for example, U.S. forces were to capture Osama bin Laden or someone less well known but of operational significance, are they to understand, the American people, that only the Field Manual -- the Field Manual only will be the interrogation method used to interrogate a target as valuable, potentially, as Osama bin Laden or someone of that operational significance?
Two, you said at the end of your remarks that the administration is contemplating future financial stability packages.  Tim Geithner on the Hill yesterday led the Finance Committee to believe something may be in the works -- a second TARP-type intervention in the financial system.  Can this administration say one of its benchmarks are that there be no more Lehman Brothers, no large bank or financial institution will fail on its watch?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, as it relates to your first question, let me get some guidance from Greg and members of the NSC.
Let me take your second question, and let me start by saying the President is very pleased that the Finance Committee voted out in a strong bipartisan manner the nomination of Tim Geithner to head the -- to head the Department of Treasury.
But Secretary-designate Geithner and Larry Summers outlined a series of principles that will go into the formulation of a larger financial stability package that the President will make decisions on shortly.  Those principles include ensuring that executive compensation is limited so that the American taxpayer can feel confident that any money that's used as a part of a financial stability package doesn't go to line the pockets of a CEO; that there's transparency in looking back in what we've done; and maybe more importantly, that any money that a financial institution receives, that that money is lent to the American people so that families can borrow money to send a kid to college or buy a car.  Those are the principles that the economic team has been working with.  Those are principles that were forwarded to the Senate last week to -- in preparation for the vote on the second $350 billion.  Larger decisions on how exactly to use that money going forward are part of an ongoing process that the economic team is formulating so that the President can make some decisions on.
Q    I have a follow-up.  Are you not prepared today to say that it would be an administration benchmark not to allow any major financial institution in this country to fail?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- I am prepared to say -- and I'll reiterate what the President said throughout the campaign and transition -- that the President will do everything possible to prevent a financial catastrophe, to ensure the working of the financial system, to get credit and lending moving again, to create -- or save or create 3-4 million jobs, to get the economy moving again.
The President comes to work each and every day and understands right now that he has to work, his team has to work, and Congress has to work on passing an economic plan that gets the economy moving again. 
Q    And since you said you need to get guidance from the NSC on my first question, is it fair for me then to conclude that it is an open question what you --
MR. GIBBS:  No, it's fair for you to conclude that I want to make sure I don't make a mistake.  (Laughter.)
Q    You talked about the financial stability package, Geithner.  Yesterday when he was on the Hill, he said that would come in a few weeks.  Looking at the economic data the President saw today, Microsoft slashing 5,000 jobs -- can it wait a few weeks?
MR. GIBBS:  The financial stability plan?  Well, I think the charge that the President has given his economic team, as well as what he said regarding Congress's activities in approving an economic recovery and reinvestment plan, is that we need to work as quickly as possible.  We have to do everything in our power, and Congress does, too, to get that package moving, to get that money into the economy to begin to create those jobs, to put people back to work, to give the American people some confidence going forward in their leadership.
The President hopes that's what everybody is here to do.  He expects that's what everybody is here to do.  And he'll work, as he said, with Democrats and Republicans to ensure that that happens each and every day.
Q    Tim Geithner yesterday said that the President would lay out a comprehensive financial package in a few weeks -- 
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I don't want to -- the President will make a decision as soon as the financial team gives him those recommendations.  He believes, obviously, that we have to act expeditiously to get this economy moving again.  I don't want to set artificial deadlines as it relates to that testimony.  I think you can be assured and the American people can be assured that the President is working throughout the day every day to ensure that a rescue plan and a financial stability package are implemented quickly.    
I think many of you heard the criticism that the President had during the campaign about the previous $350 billion, and the principles that he and his team outlined for how that should change going forward.  The American people understand that things are likely to get worse before they get better, but I think they can be reasonably assured that he is working hard every day to get the economy moving again as quickly as possible.
Q    Following up on that, the President's team has said that this financial stability package will have three components.  It will have a major housing component that's probably at least --
MR. GIBBS:  Which I forgot to mention is in there.
Q    -- $100 billion.  There will be a provision to start buying up these toxic assets.  And there will probably be some more capital injections into these banks.  Can you do that with $350 billion, or are you now looking at something considerably larger than that?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me not get ahead of an economic team that's going to be making recommendations to the President.  I know that the President, as I stated a minute ago, believes that we'll do what is necessary to ensure financial stability, that banks that get capital are lending that capital; as you mentioned, that we address the home foreclosure crisis that millions of Americans -- whether they're in those homes or live near those homes -- whether that impacts them every day, that we're working on that.  And I don't want to get in front of the recommendations that the economic team might make as it relates to that.
Helen.
Q    Is the President against torture?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes.
Q    And is the goal of these executive orders against torture, which the President says he believed in?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, the President believes that torture is wrong.  He said that throughout the campaign.  And we've taken steps today to make sure that those beliefs are upheld as it relates to detainees and interrogations.
Q    Why not to all prisons that we control?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, as Greg said, the charge that the administration -- I'm sorry, the charge that the President gave to his administration was to look at Guantanamo Bay, and that's what we've been working on today.
Q    Many outrages occurred in others -- in Iraq, in Afghanistan --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that the President -- I think that's one of the reasons the President acted, was to uphold our values while ensuring that the country is safe.  That's what --
Q    -- torture in Iraq and Afghanistan?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, under him that will certainly stop as it relates to Americans.
Q    Robert, two questions.  Just following up on the TARP issue, how seriously is the President considering this idea of a so-called "bad bank" that would buy up these toxic assets?  And then secondly, on -- the President has signaled an intention to engage early in the Middle East, but he hasn't said anything publicly about Iran.  He mentioned during the transition period, said there was only one President at a time.  Can you --
MR. GIBBS:  We still believe that.
Q    Well, yes.  (Laughter.)  But can you can give any indication of when he plans to start engaging Iran and following through on the campaign promise to engage?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me take -- as it relates to TARP, again, I don't want to get ahead of the economic team making determinations as to the best way forward to ensure financial stability.  But we are working on that as we speak.
Let me step back for a second and address the part of your question on the Middle East.  The President, as you know, started his day in the Oval Office yesterday morning and, I believe, made one call on the way to the prayer service to four Middle Eastern leaders to reiterate his strong commitment to ensuring that his administration is actively engaged in seeking long-term peace in the Middle East.  That's something he stated throughout the campaign.  He said it was something he was anxious to begin, which is why that started so quickly in the administration. 
The President believes that, as it relates to Iran, as he stated again in the campaign, that we are going to have to engage our friends and our enemies in order to make our country safe and secure.  I don't have anything specifically on what's going on with that now.  I know the President will make some announcements shortly at the State Department.
Q    Are those announcements about the envoys?
MR. GIBBS:  They are.  (Laughter.)  I've learned --
Q    Is there going to be an envoy --
MR. GIBBS:  I learned long ago not to get in the way of the principal as he's about to make news.  So I'm happy to take some questions after that, but I shouldn't get ahead of the President on what he's going to say at the State Department, except to say this, and I think this will be reflected in his remarks:  He thought it was important that the announcement today be held at the State Department, that we honor the commitment that members of the State Department and the Foreign Service make to ensuring the safety of our country and advancing our diplomatic goals throughout the world.  I think that was important for him to do.  I know that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton believes that's important, as well.
Peter.
Q    Robert, two quick questions.  Clarification on the swearing in.  Did you all ask the Chief Justice whether he thought there was a problem with the original one?
MR. GIBBS:  No.
Q    And he didn't volunteer --
MR. GIBBS:  Not that I'm aware of. 
Q    Okay.  And secondly, in his inaugural speech --
MR. GIBBS:  He brought a robe, so I assume he thought it was the real deal.  (Laughter.) 
Q    But, I mean, if he thought the first time was not valid, or not.
MR. GIBBS:  No, again, it was just a discussion in the Counsel's Office. 
Q    The second question, in the inaugural address, the President talked about this idea of responsibility.  Who does he think needs to take responsibility who hasn't taken it so far?  And what does he want Americans, regular Americans, to do to take responsibility that they don't do now?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- bear with me for a little bit longer answer.  I mean, I think -- specifically I think two entities that he had in mind regarding responsibility were the actions of this government in acting responsibly, and particularly in financial institutions in acting responsibly.  And obviously one of the things that he'll do in short order is talk about some reregulation of the financial sector to ensure that what's happened up until now doesn't happen to us again.
To the American people, I think the President spoke often throughout the campaign about reinvigorating our democracy and understanding how powerful it is when all of them are involved.  I think that's part of a renewed call to citizenship.  Obviously there are things that we can do each and every day to -- as he said, again, on the trail, to make sure our children are educated by taking responsibility to read to them, help them with their homework; energy independence, specific actions that we have to do.
I think what the President was demonstrating was that the American story has always been that when the American people come together across any sort of line to work together, that even in a country that faces challenges, problems and hardships, that working together we can get past those hardships and pass on to the next generation a country that's stronger than the one we inherited.
Q    Robert, the executive order this morning was very specific about the dates when it tells the federal government to ignore any legal advice on interrogation from September 11th of '01 right through January 20th.  Do you suspect or have any reason to believe there were late orders from the previous administration on interrogation?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't, no.
Q    Nothing necessarily that they had to ignore?
MR. GIBBS:  Not that I'm aware of. 
Q    Quickly, could you tell us a little bit of how the First Family is settling in?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, the -- I know that at the end of the first night he had to ask somebody where he was supposed to go next.  (Laughter.)  It's a pretty big house.  You know, I've known the President a long time, and he looked very comfortable in his surroundings yesterday.  I know the family has moved now three times in only a few weeks, but if you know them and then you know their family, they've had a routine for a long time.  This is a monumental testament to Michelle.  The girls have always had a very strong routine that's kept them away from all of this and all the political campaign.
They're very much the same four people that I met five years ago when I went to work for him.  Obviously it's a little different.  I do think he enjoys, to use a phrase, living above the company store, that he'll get to spend a little bit more time -- I know yesterday he, between two events, went upstairs to have dinner with them, and I think that obviously means a lot to him as a father.
Q    Robert, why did the administration believe -- why did the administration believe it was important for the American people not to know the name of the two senior administration officials who briefed us this morning on the Guantanamo -- (laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  I'm sorry, say that again.
Q    Why do the American people not have a right to know the names of the senior administration officials who briefed us this morning on the Guantanamo and related orders?
MR. GIBBS:  I hope that you all found the exercise that we did this morning helpful in further understanding the process by which the President had tasked his team to establish policies that he thinks enhances the security of the United States, and to do so in a way that helps inform you of the decisions that he's made and the decisions that he will make over the course of this, and do so in a way that's helpful to your job.
Q    Robert, do you know that you used the name of one of those senior officials' first name several times in this briefing?  (Laughter.) 
MR. GIBBS:  I do, Jonathan.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Are we allowed to repeat that, then?
MR. GIBBS:  Sorry?
Q    Are we allowed to repeat that name?
MR. GIBBS:  I'm tempted to ask you to see if you can get one person's name into the paper so people will think you might be a Brazilian soccer star.  (Laughter.) 
Ann.
Q    To follow on the transparency question --
Q    Robert, did any of the --
MR. GIBBS:  Hold on one second, I'll get right back to you.
Q    Did any of the commanders who spoke to the President on that video conference yesterday express any reservations or concerns about the speed with which he would like to withdraw troops from Iraq?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me discuss a little bit about that meeting yesterday afternoon.  The President, the Vice President, members of -- I'm sorry -- the Chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the National Security Advisor -- trying to go around the room and not -- Commander-in-Chief for Central Command -- I'm invariably going to leave people out -- were assembled in order that the President could give them a new mission as it relates to going forward in Iraq. 
The President outlined both in the campaign and again yesterday the goals that he has moving forward, that we responsibly remove in 16 months the combat brigades that are in Iraq; that we do so in a way that protects their safety, that provides the necessary opportunity for the Iraqis to take more responsibility; and also it started a process that the President thought it was important to hear from commanders on the ground and in the region. 
In addition to the military component that was at the meeting, you had former Ambassador Burns, who's at the State Department -- obviously Ambassador Crocker was involved in the meeting -- to discuss the political developments, both currently and going forward in Iraq, and what adjustments have to be done as it relates to that side of the equation.
The status of forces agreement that was -- been approved by the Iraqis sets forth an end date for our military involvement in Iraq.  What the President believes is -- I want to reiterate this, it is tremendously important -- is that he hears from all of those that are involved in this decision.  I know participants in the meeting said that specifically.  The process that will now be undertaken over the next several weeks will be to provide him access to all of those commanders in order to make a decision to responsibly remove those troops in accordance with what he said in the campaign.
Q    Well, maybe the question is, did he learn anything yesterday?  Anything he didn't already know?
MR. GIBBS:  Obviously these -- this is a group that's been assembled before in front of the President.  I think there's an ongoing discussion, an ongoing planning process.  We'll have some -- probably some stops in the next week or two to continue that comprehensive planning process, to ensure that those reasonable goals are met.
Bill, I'm sorry, yes.
Q    On the transparency issue.  How is it transparent when you control the only image of the re-swearing -- there's nobody in there but four print reporters, there's no stills, there's no television?  And the only recording that comes out, as I understand it, is one that a reporter made, not one that the White House supplied.  And how is it transparent when it looks like "play to pay" when the President gives his only interview on inauguration night to a network which paid $2 million for the privilege of exclusive coverage of an event -- the Neighborhood Ball?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me take your questions separately there.
Q    Okay.
MR. GIBBS:  I think that -- again, I think the procedures yesterday with which we brought in a print pool and released a photo provide the documentation of exactly what happened yesterday afternoon.
Q    But it's your photo.  It's not a photo made by the journalists who cover the White House.
MR. GIBBS:  No, but I think that -- I mean, I encourage you to speak to any of the four journalists that were in there.  I think the pool report accurately reflects the event and the time it was in there.  I think that's what the pool is normally charged with doing.
Q    No argument.  No argument.
MR. GIBBS:  Good.  (Laughter.)
Q    But we have a tradition -- we have a tradition here of covering the President.
Q    -- only had four people at an event that everyone in this room would have wanted to do -- you could have had more than four --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, we'd have had to get a big room.
Q    Well, you could have had more than four in the pool.
Q    Could have had a pool.
Q    The whole pool.
Q    Do you want to address the second -- you want to address the second part of the question?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, yes, let me -- the second question, you know, the -- we've done interviews throughout the transition process.  We've done -- we've answered questions from reporters.  And no interview is decided on by me or anybody else who works for the President based on who might sponsor an activity.
Q    Thanks.  When he was signing the order today banning torture, he referred to the ongoing struggle against violence and terrorism -- he did not refer to the war on terrorism.  I want to know if this is purposeful.  Has he decided to drop the war metaphor?
MR. GIBBS:  I think the language today was consistent with what he said in his inaugural address on the 20th.  I'm not aware of any larger charges than that.
Q    No decision not to use that phrase?
MR. GIBBS:  Not that I'm aware of.
April.
Q    Robert, the President has asked his senior staff to take pay freezes.  Now, is the President going to lead by example by returning money to the Treasury from his own salary or signing an executive order to cut his salary?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think his salary is determined by law.  And I think augmentations to his salary and to even some salaries outside of the Executive Office of the President but still in the executive branch of government would have to be augmented by a change in law approved by Congress.
Q    Is he going to push for that?
MR. GIBBS:  I will certainly -- I will see.
Q    Do you think he should lead by -- he says he wants to lead by example.  He is the top.  Should he lead by example?
MR. GIBBS:  We'll check on that.  I think the charge that he set out yesterday in signing that pay freeze, as part of strong ethical guidelines, was to ensure that the American people could feel confident that some of the very same things that they're having to do each day are also -- you see the example of that right here at the White House.
Q    On Gitmo, the third category of detainees that were discussed in the earlier briefing, that really kind of symbolizes a lot of why the Bush administration created Gitmo in the first place.  Now, if the panel finds that a lot of the 245 folks still down there fit in that category, and they're just moved up here to the U.S. and not put into court proceedings, what will have actually changed, except for they're now on U.S. soil?
MR. GIBBS:  In your question, you've got the phrase, "if the panel decides."  So that we don't start to prejudge or answer a series of hypothetical questions, I think it's best to let the panel decide, and bring recommendations back to the President to ensure the safety and security of the American people, and that people that would seek to do this country harm are brought to justice.  I just don't want to get ahead of a process that's only a few hours old that the President instructed members of his Cabinet and other officials to take today. 
Q    Robert, the economic stimulus plan, as you know, is moving through the House right now.  The President had hoped for a big bipartisan vote, lots of Republicans on board.  It looks like he's not going to get that.  Republicans have been very vocal in recent days about the spending.  Is the honeymoon over already?
MR. GIBBS:  I should ask that of you.  No, I -- again, I think we've got a legislative process that's continuing to happen on Capitol Hill.  The President, before coming here, was a senator, and he understands the role that the legislative branch dutifully plays in our government.  I don't think it makes a lot of sense to prejudge now what the final outcome of the legislative proposal might be. 
The President has sought the ideas of both Democrats and Republicans.  Yesterday a group of Republicans sent a letter to the White House, asking for the ability to talk to the President about the economic recovery and reinvestment plan that -- a bipartisan, bicameral group of leaders will come to the White House tomorrow to discuss the progress that we've made on a plan to put millions of people back to work. 
The President believes that we can change the way Washington works.  The President believes that we can reach across party lines and share ideas, and that all of that, as part of a process, will lead to what he hopes Congress will pass and he will sign by President's Day recess, a plan to get this economy moving forward again.
Q    He's not disappointed by what he's heard?
MR. GIBBS:  No, he's not disappointed by what he's heard so far.  I'd look at some votes that have happened on Capitol Hill.  We had a pretty strong bipartisan vote on legislation to increase the number of children that are covered by health insurance.  We've had -- we had a pretty strong vote yesterday to approve Senator Clinton to be the next Secretary of State.  We've had -- we had a very strong vote this morning to send Tim Geithner from the Finance Committee to the floor with a strong bipartisan vote.  I think throughout the nominations process, throughout the legislative process, I think you can find a lot of quotes from Republicans that show they're anxious to work with this President. 
And most of all, I think the American people are anxious to watch a President and a Congress and members of both parties work together to get this economy moving again.  They understand that we're in a period of real economic crisis, one that we haven't seen in quite some time, and that the only way for Washington to adequately respond to the crisis that the American people face is to work together.  I think that's what's going to happen in this process, and I think, as we get closer to that final passage, and ultimately the President's signature, that that will be demonstrated.
Q    Robert, what --
Q    Thank you.
MR. GIBBS:  Let me take this one real fast -- almost as exciting as the presidential dog.
The President has a BlackBerry, will -- oh, everybody is stirring, look at that -- make sure the pen still works and get --
Q    Write your lead.
MR. GIBBS:  I know.  (Laughter.)  Why did I wait?
Q    What's his email address?
MR. GIBBS:  Good question.  (Laughter.)
Q    www.noneofyourbusiness.com.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  The President has a BlackBerry, through a compromise that allows him to stay in touch with senior staff and a small group of personal friends in a way that use will be limited and that the security is enhanced to ensure his ability to communicate, but to do so effectively and to do so in a way that is protected.
Q    Are records kept?
Q    Will the records be kept?
MR. GIBBS:  The presumption regarding those emails are that they're all subject to the Presidential Records Act.  There are, as you know, some narrow exemptions in the Presidential Records Act to afford for strictly personal communications.  But, again, the presumption from the Counsel's Office is that they will be subject to the Presidential Records Act --
Q    -- hacker in Russia and China is already at work.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  That's why I didn't give the email address.
Q    Are you trying to wean him off of it?  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Nobody can do that.  I think he believes that -- he believes it's a way of keeping in touch with folks, a way of doing it outside of getting stuck in a bubble. 
I've gotten emails from him -- not recently, or not in a few days, I should say -- that go from anywhere from something that's very strictly business to "Why did my football team perform so miserably" on either any given Saturday or any given Sunday.
So I think he finds it as an important way to continue to communicate.  There's a process by which people that have access to the email will be briefed before anything like that can happen.
Jeff.
Q    How specifically will this be allowed to be used?  I mean, will all members of his senior staff be able to email him?  And how will you keep a proper chain of command and chain of communication with him?  Who can email him and who can't?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I'm not going to get into all those specifics, for obvious reasons.  But a limited group of senior staffers and some personal friends -- it's a pretty small group of people --
Q    Can you put a rough number on it?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me get some guidance from the Counsel's Office before I do something like that, so that the hackers that Bill has instructed won't start.  (Laughter.)
Q    Robert, a number of Democratic chairmen were miffed at not being given a heads up on your Cabinet posts.  These are chairmen who have jurisdiction over these members and they spoke up, they were miffed about that.  Does that suggest how you're going to share information going forward with the Hill?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President is greatly encouraged by the strong bipartisan reaction that his Cabinet members have gotten thus far, moving out of committee and many through the Senate to be confirmed.
Obviously -- and you have well documented them -- some failings on our part to keep appropriately apprised some members of the House and the Senate.  But we are working closely with members of the House and Senate on anything from nominations to an economic recovery and reinvestment plan that will get our economy moving again.
Again, the President's most previous job experience before coming here was as a member of the Senate and he understands the importance of consulting with and keeping apprised the Congress.
Thanks, guys, see you tomorrow.
END           2:29 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 1/23/09

Press Briefing by Press Secretary Robert Gibbs
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:18 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS:  Good afternoon.  Let me just get organized here for a second.
Let me, before I take a few of your questions, let me -- a couple of announcements for you.  First of all, the President made three phone calls today to foreign leaders.  First, to Prime Minister Harper of Canada.  Next to King Abdallah of Saudi Arabia.  And lastly, to Prime Minister Brown of the United Kingdom.  We'll have a readout for you guys a little bit later on what was covered in each of those calls.
In addition to that, the President has just talked to Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, and congratulated her on her appointment.  And I want to read a statement from the President on that:
"Governor Paterson made a wonderful choice in appointing Kirsten Gillibrand to fill Secretary Clinton's seat in the United States Senate.  I am confident that she will continue Secretary Clinton's distinguished service to the people of New York and to our country.
"During her career Kirsten has been a strong voice for transparency and reform in government, and shares the belief that government should be open, accessible and work for all of our citizens.
"In Congress and as the Special Counsel for the Department of Housing and Urban Development she worked to strengthen public and private partnerships, to invest in infrastructure, and in New York's economy.  At this time of great challenge I know that Kirsten has the integrity, character and dedication to public service to help us achieve our greatest goals."
And also we'll have some information later today on executive orders, later this afternoon.
And with that, let me take a few of your questions.
Q    Thanks, Robert.  This morning, this event with the bicameral -- or bipartisan leaders the President had, obviously what he wants to do is draw on as much bipartisan support as he can for the stimulus package.  But will there come a point when the President and Democratic leadership in Congress just decide to have the vote and pass the package, whether Republicans like it or not?  They're asking for things that are probably not likely to get in there.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me step back and give you a -- maybe begin with a little bit broader answer, because I think there was a lot of agreement in that room this morning about the notion that we are facing an economic crisis unlike we've seen in quite some time.
There was an agreement that we must act quickly to stimulate the economy, to create jobs, to put money back in people's pockets.  And there was a commitment to ensuring that the funds that are appropriated to do that are spent quickly.  The President was pleased to be part of the meeting with members of the House and Senate, both parties.  He wants to hear ideas and hopes that Washington can put aside its partisan differences in order to get the American people what they deserve -- and that is a package that will get the economy going.
Q    Well, let me ask that a little bit different way, then.  Republicans came out to the stakeout and talked about some ideas having to do with taxes and other things that they really want to see in that package.  Is the President going to listen to those ideas and include them so he gets their votes?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the President is certainly going to listen to any ideas, as he said in his first meeting on Capitol Hill --
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me get the -- let me answer it largely the way you asked it.  He wants to solicit those ideas.  As you know, the letter came down from the House Republicans asking to see the President about a series of ideas, and that meeting happened today.  The President will also go to Capitol Hill the beginning of next week to talk to Republican caucuses and solicit their input and their ideas.
The legislative process, as we all know, is a long and winding road; that we assume will continue until we get a package that Congress passes and the President signs.  We look forward to continuing to seek their ideas, to seek their input, and have a process whereby those ideas can be debated and voted on.  I think that's what the American people want, and I think, most of all, that's what they deserve.
Q    Robert, this morning the President talked about at least a three-legged stool, in terms of packages for the economy.  What are the other legs aside from the stimulus package?  And second question, and perhaps related, does the President intend to go back to Congress and ask for more money to clean up the banking system?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President has said throughout the transition and throughout this process of putting together a reinvestment and recovery plan was that that alone was not a magic or silver bullet for this economy.  Obviously there is going to be -- have to be a financial stability package to ensure that credit flows, that families are able to borrow money, that small businesses are able to borrow money.  And I think, as the President said today at the beginning of that meeting, that we are going to have to very quickly look at a financial regulatory system that ensures we don't get into this mess again.
I think actually there's probably more legs to that stool that he talked about -- that only through a series of all of these things happening are we likely to move the economy in a place that creates more jobs, that lends families and small businesses the money that they need, and ensures the American people have confidence that this kind of stuff isn't going to happen again.
On your second question, and I said this yesterday, the economic team is putting together a series of proposals and some ideas for the President on a financial stability package.  The principles that were outlined by Secretary-designate Geithner to the Finance Committee, and by Larry Summers to the House and the Senate last week before -- I think it was last week, they all run together -- the votes on the additional $350 billion that include a plan to address home foreclosures, to ensure that executive compensation is reined in, and again to ensure, as I've said a couple of times already here today, that the money that banks receive is lent to consumers, families and small businesses, to ensure that the economy works.  And I think that's -- he looks forward to hearing recommendations from his team on that.
Q    Is there a time frame on that, Robert?
MR. GIBBS:  Soon.
Q    Robert, I know that the President has said that he wants to create between 3 to 4 million jobs with this package --
MR. GIBBS:  Save or create.
Q    Exactly.  There is skepticism among Republicans whether or not this could happen.  What kind of reassurances is he giving?  Then, on Pakistan, was he consulted before the strike, or did he consult with Pakistan on that?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me take your Pakistan question first.  As you know, I'm not going to comment on those matters.  On creating jobs --
Q    You took the question, sir.  (Laughter.)  You took the question, and that's it.
Q    What do you mean by that, Robert?  You will never speak of any operational action taken by the United States military, is that what you're saying?
MR. GIBBS:  I'm not going to speak about these matters today.
Q    Okay, I'm just a little confused because you took the question and then --
MR. GIBBS:  And I gave you my answer.
Q    Okay, second question --
MR. GIBBS:  My answer was, I wasn't going to talk about that.
The first question related to saving or creating 3 or 4 million jobs in order to get this economy going again -- the charge that he gave his economic team was to come up with a plan that would do just that.
Our CEA-designate Chair Christine Romer presented the President in December with a report and some modeling about what would happen to our economy if nothing was done to reinvigorate it.  We released some of that information to you on some Saturday morning radio addresses that showed us getting quickly into an unemployment rate that is in the double digits.
The team was presented with that data, and came up with a plan to ensure that we can create or save 3 to 4 million jobs to get the economy moving again.  We have all the confidence that those goals can be met given some of the things that the President has outlined that he hopes Congress will do:  spending money on infrastructure and investments and putting money back into people's pockets; some assistance for state governments as they deal with budget crunches; and ensuring that things like Medicaid and  health care aren't cut.  But the economic team put that together, and we believe we can meet those goals.
Chip.
Q    On this idea of bipartisan, obviously he has made very clear he wants a broad bipartisan majority to pass the stimulus package.  But you've got people, even like Dick Durbin, his good buddy, who says if it's passed with 63 votes or 73 votes, history won't remember it.  And you've got Republican leaders now saying that on the House side, Democrats are just barreling ahead with very little interest in any kind of bipartisan support.  Does he need to be twisting arms of Democrats to get them to take the idea of bipartisan support more seriously?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the letter that was sent and the action that was taken on that letter to put together a bipartisan meeting today should demonstrate for Democrats, Republicans and the American people that the President is serious about doing this in a bipartisan way.  Again --
Q    But Democrats on the Hill don't seem to be serious about it.  Is he applying pressure on them to get them into the fold here?
MR. GIBBS:  I think -- again, I think the meeting today demonstrates -- and the existence of members of both parties demonstrates the willingness to work in a bipartisan manner.  It's what the American people most deserve.
Again, I think that one of the things we have to stress is that there was a lot of agreement in that room this morning.  Some tendency is to cover things that we disagree on.  I think there's -- there should be also a tendency to cover what is agreed upon, which is that we're facing a great crisis, that we must act quickly, and that we do so in a prudent way that changes the way Washington has previously done business.  Those are the tasks that the President has set forth for his economic team.  He believes that Congress is making good progress.  He appreciates that, and looks forward to making sure that something is on his desk by President's Day recess so that we can get this economy moving again.
Jake.
Q    The President wants this package to be bipartisan and he wants it to be stimulative.  But when it passed out of the House Appropriations Committee on Wednesday, not one Republican voted for it.  And there are lots of elements of this bill that economists say are not stimulative.  There's $726 million for after-school snacks, $50 million for the NEA, $44 million to repair the USDA, and $200 million to work on the National Mall, including grass.  Does President Obama think that what passed out of the House Appropriations Committee on Wednesday was bipartisan and was stimulative?
MR. GIBBS:  There's no question that the President believes that the bill is stimulative.  Our analysis of the legislation right now is that 75 percent of this money will be spent in the next 18 months to create jobs and to get people working and to get the economy moving again.  Absolutely, it's stimulative.  It puts money back in people's pockets that we believe they'll spend and help the economy.
Look, I don't want to get into this or that vote count in certain committees.  This is -- as I said, this process is long and one that will wind through many curves, and the President looks forward to working with members of Congress from both parties to ensure that it happens.
Major.
Q    President Bush, after 9/11, said the United States and its government was engaged in a war on terror.  Is that what this administration calls it, and if not, why?  Secondarily, on your point about stimulative, the CBO has said that $219 billion of the $825 billion in the House bill cannot be spent and will not be spent until 2011 at the earliest.  How is that --
MR. GIBBS:  Is this the CBO report that came out earlier this week?
Q    Yes.
MR. GIBBS:  Okay.
Q    What is the President's appraisal of that CBO analysis, and what do you know here that the Congressional Budget Office, a neutral observer, doesn't know?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me outline what we know.
Q    Don't forget the first question.
MR. GIBBS:  The first question I think I alluded to some yesterday -- look, I would point you to the words that the President said in his inaugural address about the challenges that we face.
On the stimulus package -- and I've got a letter that we'll make sure that each of you have that our OMB Director sent to the Senate Budget Committee Chairman, Kent Conrad -- we believe, looking at the packages that exist, that 75 percent of the money will be spent out in an 18-month period of time, with great stimulative effect.
The CBO report looked at a -- only a portion of the legislation and looked at that portion of the legislation before it began the committee process that Jake was talking about -- a snapshot in time that's long past.  It doesn't reflect increased spend-out rates.  The letter that Mr. Orszag sent to Conrad states that the administration will hold the line on ensuring that at least 75 percent of that money is spent out over an 18-month period.  And there are things that can be done in the legislation to ensure that that happens.
Let me give you an example, just so you know.  There's a provision to speed the money that says if in -- I think in the CBO analysis was 120 days on some projects -- if the money is not spent, then that money is basically reshuffled to other projects.  They found that the spend-out rate on 120 days was actually less than a spend-out rate on 180 days, right, so that legislation gets tweaked to 180 days, because the CBO determined that that reshuffling of money would delay its spend-out rates.
So those tweaks can be made, and have -- I think in some cases have been made, to ensure that three-quarters of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act are spent in the first year-and-a-half, that will create jobs, that will get people working again, get the economy moving again.  That's what the President set out to do, and that's what this bill does.
Q    If I could follow up, since you mentioned Christine Romer, she has a very substantial body of written work as an economist, assessing what brought the United States out of recession and depression.  And in each of those reports, she concluded it was monetary policy that was a driving force in lifting the U.S. economy, not direct government spending.  She said that about the Depression and subsequent recessions.  What is it about this circumstance that gives you greater confidence than she found, looking at all of those economic circumstances that direct spending can turn the tide?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I'm not an economist and I don't play one on TV, and I won't play one on TV today.  Obviously, the Fed and a number of other places have taken a lot of monetary steps that I think many have commented we have very few of those left.  The report that she prepared for the President, based on the package that we were putting together, did show that the plan would create jobs, would stimulate the economy, would make important and necessary investments for our long-term growth.  She's confident, the economic team is confident -- and most importantly, the President is confident -- that this is a package that will help turn our economy around.
Things will likely get worse before they get better.  But I believe, and the President believes, that Congress has to act quickly to ensure that this package gets on his desk by President's Day recess, so that we can begin turning the economy around.
Chuck.
Q    Robert, two questions.  One, do you rule out asking for another stimulus package after this year if the economy -- if there's a determination that --
MR. GIBBS:  Look, let's get one done, and start seeing that impact the economy before I get into hypotheticals about what we might do later on in the year.
Q    And other U.S. officials have confirmed these Predators are on air strikes -- Pakistan.  What is it about confirming whether the President was consulted --
MR. GIBBS:  I'm not going to get into these matters.
Q    How does that compromise operational security?
MR. GIBBS:  I'm not going to get into these matters.
Q    Don't you think it's justifiable curiosity, Robert, about the President's first military action --
MR. GIBBS:  I think there are many things that you should be justifiably curious about, but I'm not going to get into talking about --
Q    If other members of the U.S. government are confirming this, why is it that you can't comment?
MR. GIBBS:  I'm not going to get into these matters.
Q    What concrete, hit-home factors will the average person see after 18 months of this 75 percent payout?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, we believe that more people will be back to work.  We believe more people will have money in their pocket to spend.  We believe that through a series of steps we'll also have a financial stability package that will have credit flowing so that people can borrow money, that will address -- begin to address the home foreclosure crisis that millions of Americans face, whether they live in homes that are being foreclosed in, or they live near homes that are being foreclosed in.
I think there are a lot of things that the American people will see as a part of this package.  That's why the President believes, and members of Congress shared in that belief today, that it has to get done quickly.
Q    Do you see any turnaround in economic indicators that that will be noticeable after 18 months?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I refer you to the reports that we put out about this.  I do think that, as I've said, as the President has said, this is -- it's not going to get better overnight.  We didn't get here overnight.  And things are likely to get worse before they get better.
Our hope is that this work can be done quickly, that the money can get into the economy quickly.  That's why we're committed strongly to ensuring that that money is spent prudently, but done in a way that does it quickly enough to create jobs, and that all those tests can be met by this package.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, the President this morning expressed a degree of concern over the -- some banks that have remodeled their offices, he mentioned bathrooms and so forth.  And these are some of the same banks that have gotten taxpayer assistance.  Does he plan to try to recover the money, or what did he have in mind there?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think as I've mentioned, as was outlined in principles that Larry Summers sent to Congress and that Secretary-designate Geithner have talked to the Finance Committee about, that as we move forward with a financial stability package he's asked his team to ensure that safeguards and controls are put into place to ensure that money that's gotten doesn't go to line the pockets of people that may have gotten us into some of these messes.
That's the charge that he's given his economic team to come back to him as we move forward on these packages.  The American people need to be reasonably -- the American people need to be greatly assured that their hard-earned money is not going to the bonuses or the remodeling of an office at a bank that's in trouble.  That money needs to go directly to the American people in the form of loans -- whether it's a student loan, or an auto loan, or a small business so that it can meet its payroll.  That's what the financial stability package should do, and that's what he's asked his team to ensure that is put together so that the next money that's spent to stabilize our financial system is spent differently and more transparently than that first set of money was used for.
Q    Will he try to recover the money?
MR. GIBBS:  I'm not going to get ahead of the recommendations that the team are going to put together and put in front of the President.
Laura.
Q    If the stimulus package winds up passing Congress with no or very minimal Republican support, will the administration view that as a disappointment?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again --
Q    It's not a hypothetical, because given the committee vote it's a very real possibility in the House.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, we've all spent a lot of time in Washington.  I'm not going to prejudge the final outcome of a legislative vote based on the inner workings of a particular committee vote.  I think we can all go back and look and find examples of reasons why.
The President strongly believes, and members of Congress that were here today -- representing Democrats and Republicans -- believe we're in a crisis and that we have to act quickly.  That's the charge that he laid out for his economic team.  That's the charge that Congress understands and that Congress is acting quickly on.  He's happy with the progress that they've made and that the American people deserve two political parties that can work together to address the most urgent and important needs of the American people in this economy.  And that's -- that's the definition by which we'll measure success.
Q    Would he veto a bill -- would he veto a bill if it didn't have Republican support?  Would he veto a bill --
MR. GIBBS:  Guys, guys -- you know, you guys are at least several weeks ahead of where the process is.
Q    Just to follow up --
MR. GIBBS:  No, hold on, let me -- let me give you a fuller answer to the myriad of hypothetical questions.
The President believes, and Congress believes -- that's why they came together today to work on this -- this is a work in progress.  It didn't end today; it didn't start today.  There's a committee process; there's a floor process.  We all understand the different sausage-making aspects of legislation.  I think it's a little premature to prejudge all of this.
I think the one thing you can take from today is, the President underscored his willingness to listen to ideas from both parties, invited members of both parties in both the House and the Senate to come down and share those ideas; looks forward to going up to Capitol Hill Tuesday to do the very same thing, and continue making steady and sure progress on legislation that will -- we believe will get this economy moving again for the American people.
Q    Robert, in the interest of either speed or a bigger bipartisan vote, the President has got the bully pulpit now.  Does he anticipate traveling, trying to sell the plan more, turn up the heat, perhaps, in members of Congress and their districts?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President believes that the steps that happened today and that have happened are constructive to getting strong bipartisan support for this.  I don't know of any travel plans that the President has at the moment.  I think his work and attention are urgently needed here in Washington.  He will travel up to Capitol Hill to listen to more of those ideas, and ensure their outcome.
Ann.
Q    State of the Union address, will he deliver one?
MR. GIBBS:  I think it is likely that he will speak to Congress -- to a joint session of Congress sometime in February.  I don't believe that we're -- we've got a date nailed down as far as that.  I know there's been interest among your bosses as to when that might be, and how that coincides with "Dancing With the Stars."  (Laughter.)  And I don't mean Congress when I say "Dancing With the Stars."  (Laughter.)
And so it's something we'll do.  I just don't know the time frame for when that happens, and when that will take place.
Michael.
Q    There was a report today that the President is withdrawing Jim Jones and Larry Summers from the World Economic Forum at Davos.  Is there a reason for that?  Is there some message that's trying to be sent for the fact that the two of them are not going as originally planned?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't know anything about that.  So I don't have anything for you on that, I apologize.
Peter.
Q    Robert, if by your estimate 75 percent of this money would be spent in the first 18 months, that means 25 percent wouldn't, and therefore wouldn't be useful in the immediate term of jump-starting the economy.  Why spend that, then?  Shouldn't that by done in a different form --
MR. GIBBS:  The President -- this administration is committed to ensuring that -- I will read the -- "We're committed to maintaining at least a 75 percent spend-out rate for the package as a whole as the legislation moves through the Senate and House, and into conference."  And again, I'll get you guys all a copy of the letter that was sent to Senator Conrad.
Q    The other 25 percent is excessive then?
MR. GIBBS:  No, I think that -- and I'll get you some comments from Peter Orszag on this -- that we also want to ensure that, in his terms, we don't create an air pocket whereby there is no economic recovery and reinvestment, and that somehow it all just stops at once.  I think Peter thinks that's important, and so does the President.
Q    You had a question yesterday on Osama bin Laden you said you would check and get back to us.
MR. GIBBS:  I think folks did check and get back to you guys.
Q    Robert, what level of tax cuts is the President willing to accept in the stimulus package?  And also, there's been some analysis that shows that the tax cuts that have been posed will not necessarily generate -- would not necessarily help small business, but would help business at large.  Does the President have a feeling about that?  Should whatever level of tax cuts is present, should that be targeted for a small business?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President believes that a tax cut should be targeted toward creating jobs and getting the economy moving again.  I don't know that there's a magic dry erase board with a center proportion or figure on it somewhere in the White House.  The President believes that those tax cuts should go to creating jobs and putting money back into the pockets of people who've seen their wages slide, even as some have done quite well in an economy that is suffering for them.  I think that's what the package does.
Q    Two for you.  Did the President give his email address to anybody in that bipartisan congressional meeting today?  (Laughter.)  And, then, why was Mark Dybul first asked to remain as coordinator of the Global AIDS Office, and then asked to submit his resignation?  And what type of leader would President Obama like to have in the AIDS office?
MR. GIBBS:  I was going to think of something cute on the email address, but nothing comes to mind that would be good.  I think we covered the BlackBerry yesterday, that there's a small group of people that are able to BlackBerry with the President so that he can stay in touch with them.
I think that the President has certainly asked members of Congress that have ideas to call the White House.  I know that Rahm has certainly given out his cell phone number to members of the House, the Senate and probably a lot of you all in here -- (laughter) -- to stay in touch if people have ideas that meet the President's test of getting the economy moving again.
I will -- I don't have anything on the AIDS office.  I have not read anything on that.
Q    On his BlackBerry, Robert -- the President said yesterday when he left here that it wasn't up and running yet.  Is it up and running today?
MR. GIBBS:  I will check.  I believe that it -- I believe that it is.  But I will -- I will double check on that.
Yes.
Q    Thanks.  We've been getting some pre-action, I guess you'd call it, today from family planning advocates who expect that the President will lift the gag rule on NGOs accepting funding and talking about abortion, et cetera.  And I'm wondering if you can, in advance, give us any sort of preview about his thinking on this, its impact.  And also, how might that -- is there anything comparable domestically that he's planning to do with regard to abortion policy?
MR. GIBBS:  As I said yesterday, I've -- as a part of my overall career advancement, I've found it useful to get out of the way of a principal that might be making news on certain subjects later on in the afternoon.  And I will exercise that right again today and ask you to stay tuned for a statement from the President possibly on those issues.
Q    Yesterday you said that there would be a very limited number of waivers for the ethics lobbying policy.  There's thousands of people covered by that policy.  Does "limited" mean dozens?  Does it mean a handful?  And also, where are those waivers being approved?  Is it being approved at the Cabinet Secretary level, that is then forwarded to the Counsel's Office -- or is that something that Rahm is taking a look at every waiver request as it comes in?
MR. GIBBS:  I think that that work is done mostly out of the Counsel's Office.  And I should restate part of what I said yesterday relating to ethics, that I think many observers that have watched the way administrations conduct their business, either ethically or in the open, found that the policies that the President outlined and signed on the first full -- on his first full day at the White House exceed that of any other administration in the history of our government.
Q    Can you give any estimate?  I mean, limited numbers -- should we expect many more?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't have anything more than "limited number."
Q    The President spoke on Tuesday about how he wanted to have a new way forward with the Muslim world.  How is he going to start bringing that about?  And does he still intend to travel to a major Islamic forum in the first 100 days to take that message?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me punt on that until we have something to add to it specifically.  Obviously the President was, in his first act in the Oval Office, involved in re-engaging this country in a process to bring about a lasting peace to the Middle East.  Some of the content of the calls that he made today were about that.  You all saw and read his comments yesterday at the State Department regarding what's happening in the Middle East, and obviously a commitment in former Senator George Mitchell to be actively involved in this process, to bring about that lasting peace.
Former Senator Mitchell is somebody who has a long record of bringing about peace in troubled parts of the world.  And I think the President believes that he's got the right person for the job.
Q    When does the President expect to appoint a so-called auto czar?  And do you contemplate flexibility in that March 31st deadline for the firms to demonstrate viability under the terms of the bailout?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't want to get ahead of any announcements that the President might make, per my dictum earlier.  I think that obviously the auto industry is something that this government has been involved in at the end of the previous administration, and obviously those are issues that this administration will be involved in.  But I don't want to get ahead of sort of where any of those announcements might be made.
Q    Does March 31st give you adequate time, give the administration adequate time for judging the viability of those firms?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the -- as I've -- I think the plans are due sort of mid-February.  I think that once those come in we'll have a better sense of sort of how to evaluate all that.
Q    Robert, could you explain the kind of information the President will be getting in his daily economic briefing, and what it might add to what the general public knows about what's happening in the economy?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I did not go to today's -- or I think today's has maybe not happened quite yet.  But yesterday they ran through what some of the economic statistics that the government has come out with, what that means about what we know about the overall health of the economy.  Obviously it wasn't good news.  The jobless claims numbers were bigger than they've been in quite some time, and the housing news was quite grim, too.  Mr. Summers went through some developments, as well.
The President asked that this be done each day in a way that's analogous to the highly professional way that he gets intelligence information each day; that we obviously don't have a comparable department that does that, and this is done throughout government by Treasury and NEC and CEA and a whole host of other departments that could find, on any given day, being part of that briefing and information that's brought to the President's attention on different news, I think, without getting into the specifics of exactly what he sees each day.
Q    Thank you.  There has been some talk about making the White House a green example on your environmental energy front.  Is there any thought to doing an energy audit, having some experimental energy-saving programs here at the White House to make this a natural laboratory for energy efficiency?
MR. GIBBS:  You know, I know the President -- obviously this is an issue that -- energy efficiency was something he talked about extensively throughout the campaign, the need to make our country far less dependent on foreign sources of oil and energy.  And I believe that some of that will take place here in the White House.  I don't have anything specific, though, on that right now.
Q    Thank you, Robert.  Robert, before we let you go, could you stick with the week-ahead Friday tradition --
MR. GIBBS:  Which is?  (Laughter.)
Q    -- and give us a look ahead?
MR. GIBBS:  The Super Bowl is in a week --
Q    You need to tell us everything that's going to happen next week, every day.
MR. GIBBS:  And succinctly so that we can all write it down --
Q    Out of an overabundance of caution.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Sure.  I'm not yet sworn in as the White House Press Secretary.  (Laughter.)
Q    In addition, some -- at least a rough sketch on the weekend plans --
MR. GIBBS:  Yes.
Q    Thank you.
MR. GIBBS:  I'm far more informed about that than I am about your previous question.
Q    We'll ask you next Friday.
MR. GIBBS:  You give me a little heads up and I will be more prepared for the traditions I'm not yet familiar with.
The last scheduling guidance that I got for the President was that he would have an economic meeting in the White House tomorrow, and we'll find out for you whether that's something that we'll do a picture or a spray of.
Q    Who with?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me get all that information.  I think it will be a broader group of people.  And we'll also -- I will endeavor to get you guys a little better guidance for this week.  My former colleagues neglected to tell me about your Friday traditions.  (Laughter.)  So let me work on --
Q    Nothing on Sunday?
MR. GIBBS:  Nothing that I know of right now, and I asked for guidance on the whole weekend.
Q    Is he going to church?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't know; I can certainly check on that.
Q    Radio address topic?
MR. GIBBS:  The radio address will happen and -- (laughter) -- I guess I buried the lead on that, right?  I will endeavor as a good peace offering to try to get that to you all at a time that is easier for you to use and understand and won't have you checking your inboxes at 6:00 a.m. on a Saturday.
Q    Are you going to keep posting that on YouTube or is it going to go on the White House -- a video of that going to go on --
MR. GIBBS:  I think the plan is for it to go -- I'm sure that's a tradition, too.  (Laughter.)  I believe it will go on the White House website.  You know, the hope is that -- the President talked about making sure the American people understand what he's thinking and what goes into his decision-making process, and we think YouTube and other outlets, the website, are good ways for the American people to understand where he is and what he's thinking.  And we'll continue to do that.  I think he's excited about doing that.
Thanks, guys.  See you, guys.
                            END                     1:57 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 1/26/09

Press Briefing by Press Secretary Robert Gibbs

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:42 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS:  Good afternoon, guys, how are you?  Good, let me just get organized here and bring you up to date on a couple of announcements.
The first of which, our apologies if you've emailed any of us in the last two and a half hours, our email system is not working so well.  So our apologies on that, and we'll endeavor to get you information from earlier in the day hopefully in a little bit more of a timely manner if we can get the email to work.
A couple of quick things before I take your questions.  The President made a series of phone calls to foreign leaders today, which we'll have a readout on in just a little bit.  He talked with Chancellor Merkel of Germany, President Medvedev of Russia, and President Sarkozy of France.  Also later on today the President will host Senator Mitchell and Secretary of State Clinton in the Cabinet Room to discuss Senator Mitchell's trip beginning this evening to the Middle East to begin the process that the President promised to be actively engaged in, the peace process there in the Middle East.
He'll visit Cairo, Jerusalem, Ramallah, Amman, Riyadh, Paris, and London on this trip.  And I know the State Department has more details if you need some of them.
Q    Robert, what time is that meeting?
MR. GIBBS:  It is at 4:15 p.m.
Q    Is there any press coverage of the meeting?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, the pool will be brought into the Cabinet Room for that.
Q    Could you give us those cities one more time, Robert?
MR. GIBBS:  Sorry?
Q    The cities one more time?
MR. GIBBS:  Cairo, Jerusalem, Ramallah, Amman, Riyadh, Paris, and London.
Q    No Gaza?
MR. GIBBS:  No.  And with that, let me take a few questions.
Q    Thanks, Robert.  This morning Susan Rice was up at the U.N. and talked about direct diplomacy with Iran.  Assuming she's not freelancing here, can you describe a little more fully about what she meant by that -- at the President's direction?  What sort of direct diplomacy?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me begin by first saying that the administration is pleased that the Senate has confirmed Ambassador Rice to what the President believes is a very important job.
I think what Ambassador Rice outlined today was simply to restate the position that I think many of you heard the President outline throughout the campaign for the past two years, that this administration is going to use all elements of our national power to address the concerns that we have with Iran.  There are no specific initiatives that we're announcing either at the U.N. or here today, and when we have anything more specific to announce, then we'll do so.
Q    So you can't say when this diplomacy will begin or how --
MR. GIBBS:  No, again, I don't -- again, it's not a specific announcement, but more the restating -- again, I think whether you were on the campaign trail or not, clearly this was something that generated a lot of coverage over the past two years, and I think Ambassador Rice was simply restating the position that the President had.
Chip.
Q    Hey, Robert, yesterday on the Sunday shows you had Larry Summers talking about a housing plan.  In talking about the stimulus plan and then talking about a financial -- you talked about it from the podium last week -- when are you guys going to announce a housing plan and where is the money -- are you going to be asking for new money for this housing plan?  Is it part of the $350 billion coming from TARP?  Where?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, as you know, in principles that went to Congress before they voted on the second $350 billion, one of the components of those principles was money to address home foreclosures.  And as I was asked about in this room last week, there are a number of aspects that the President has asked his economic team to formulate policies on and recommendations for him to make decisions about, specifically addressing home foreclosures, addressing financial stability in banks.
Q    You separated that out, that's what I -- so is it -- does that mean it's not going to be part of the $350 billion?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I know that part of that is going to be part of the $350 billion.  There may also be additional steps that are taken outside of that.  But before I announce a housing plan, let me have the economic team put a series of proposals in front of the President to do that.
I do think what is incredibly important for you and for the American people to understand is the President believes that -- and outlined this to Congress before they voted -- we have to use the second $350 billion far differently than we used the first $350 billion to address the foreclosure crisis, to do so in a way that's transparent, so the American people will know where the money is going.
There was a report today in the Wall Street Journal that many of the banks that had gotten money are actually lending less now that they have that money.  That clearly has to change.  The point of that money was to go to banks to free up lending, free up credit, capital.
Q    Are you going to order banks to lend more?
MR. GIBBS:  We're going to change the way that money works to ensure that money that is injected into banks is used to provide small businesses with loans, to provide families with college or auto loans.  We have to do so in a way that's transparent.  And we have to make sure that there's some change in executive compensation as it relates to entities that participate in that program or get the money.
Caren.
Q    What kind of a relationship does President Obama hope to establish with China?  Tim Geithner's comments last week branding China a currency manipulator caused a stir in Beijing.  Do specific trade actions follow from that?  And also, more broadly, could you talk about what kind of relationship he wants with Beijing, not only on economic issues, but on security and others?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, obviously China is a big player in the world economy.  It is an area that we clearly have to have a vibrant policy on.  As it relates to what Mr. Geithner I guess wrote in testimony, rather than saying, is that he was restating what the President had said during the campaign.  We have to take a comprehensive approach to enhancing our economic relationship with China, including the currency issue.
As you know, by law the administration -- every administration since 1989 has had to make a determination about currency each spring.  That determination will be made not any differently in this administration, sometime in the spring.
So what Mr. Geithner was doing was restating what the President had said during the campaign, not making any determinations.
Q    Although the Bush administration avoided using that terminology because of the trade actions that it implies.
MR. GIBBS:  Right.  Well, again, I think it's safe to say that this administration, like others, will determine in the spring what that means.
Let me say one thing as it relates to Mr. Geithner, we are hopeful that sometime later today he'll be approved by the full Senate.  The nomination, as I understand it, will be voted on later this afternoon, and we hope that he's sworn in and gets to work very quickly on any series of projects relating to financial stability and recovery and reinvestment.
I think we all today saw a series of companies that have made job announcements, and not the kind of job announcements you want to stand up and trumpet.  Several companies laid out -- including Caterpillar, an Illinois company that announced the layoffs totaling more than 43,000 employees.  I think it underscores the necessity and the need to work swiftly to get a recovery and reinvestment plan through Congress and on the President's desk, so that he can sign it and we can start using that money to get this economy moving again.
Q    Robert, you spoke earlier about the Journal story.  And one of the 13 banks that got TARP funds but has not been lending money -- more so in the fourth quarter than in the third quarter -- is Citigroup.  Citigroup is spending $50 million on a new corporate jet.  And I'm wondering if President Obama or the Obama administration has a position on whether or not corporations that are getting tens of billions of dollars in these funds should be refraining from expenses such as these, or corporate executive compensation?
And about the announcements President Obama made today, one of the reasons of course why these CAFE standards and emission vehicle standards, a lot of these actions have been -- have not happened yet, is because of the concern that it would hurt the ailing auto industry.  How can President Obama ensure that these moves will not cost jobs?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's split these questions up and take a few moments.
Obviously, the President believes that great care should be used any time the taxpayers' money is being used to do something for the greater good, particularly injecting capital into banks so that they can lend money.  The President said this during the transition, as it related to the auto companies using private jets; doesn't believe that's the best use of money at this point.  Instead that money should be used to lend to consumers, to get the economy moving again, to free up capital and credit, and help small businesses create jobs.  He said that as it relates to the auto industry and he believes that as it relates to banks as well.
Let me now address your second question, which is fuel efficiency standards.  And understand that the debate on fuel efficiency standards is not one that started last fall -- it didn't even start in the last decade.  This is a 27, 30-year-old debate back and forth about auto mileage standards.
The particular action that the President took today was to take legislation that Congress approved in December of 2007, and President Bush signed, and in January of 2009 implement changed CAFE standards for model year 2011.
So I don't think it comes as any surprise to automakers or consumers that a change in our fuel mileage standards was on the horizon.  In fact, between December of 2007 and October of 2010 -- which is when manufacturers begin the next model year -- we believe, and I've seen testimony from the auto companies, that changing those fuel mileage standards is certainly doable.  The President wants to work with the auto industry to ensure that the fuel-efficient cars of tomorrow are produced and built here in America for Americans to buy.
And I think that working -- government working with the auto industry can ensure that we have a sustainable path toward the production or more fuel-efficient autos, that those fuel-efficient autos will be more appealing to American consumers, and that that can be a win-win for both.  The actions that the President took today put us on the path when we realize a fuel efficiency standard of 35 miles to the gallon -- it's 27.5 now -- 35 miles to the gallon will constitute a savings of 2 million barrels of oil a day, which is roughly comparable to the amount of oil that we import each day from the Persian Gulf.
So the President is taking the actions of Congress, ensuring that we take bold, demonstrative steps towards energy independence and reducing what we are forced to import every day from countries, many of whom don't like us.
Q    Robert, clearly a majority of the Congress, as you pointed out, two years ago felt like this is a smart move on fuel efficiency standards.  However, that was before one or more of the automakers were teetering on the edge of bankruptcy and the federal government was handing --
MR. GIBBS:  This is a -- if you go back to the mid-'80s, you'll find this debate.  In the late '80s --
Q    But here we are now.
MR. GIBBS:  -- in the early '90s, in the mid-'90s, in the late '90s, in the early 2000s, in the mid-2000s, and now the late 2000s.  I think you could make a case that it is time to update our fuel efficiency standards to create a product that is more appealing to the American consumer; to do so with some help, to ensure that the consumers have something that they want to buy and the manufacturers have something that they can produce and sell in this country.
Q    So the question, though, is now, where we are, does the President believe it's worth it to move forward, obviously, on these initiatives, even if one of more of the automakers --
MR. GIBBS:  I think you heard the President say today that -- and I don't know whether it was in this building or whether it was on Capitol Hill, but President Nixon declared that we were going to take steps to reduce our dependence on foreign oil.  And you can find clips that go from President Nixon through the most previous, President Bush.
The time to have this debate and the time to talk back and forth, the President believed, was over; and the time for decisive action that got our country on a path towards reduced dependence on foreign oil -- that was something he believed should start today.
Q    And the President today said, again --
MR. GIBBS:  Let me just point out, we're talking about model year 2011, okay.  The law states that auto companies are required to have 18 months simply from the directive -- from rules being passed to production to plan, right.  So not only do you have that 18 months, but again, you have a proposal that Congress passed in December of 2007 -- I think more than -- more than adequately gives companies and suppliers the planning time that they need, and consumers -- so the consumers can make decisions.
Q    The President again promised today that he could create a million new green jobs.  Could you define in simply terms, what is a "green" job?  He keeps using that term, but nobody -- it doesn't seem like anyone really understands what that is.  Right now, people just keep reading, as you mentioned, jobs being lost.  He keeps talking about creating --
MR. GIBBS:  Sure.
Q    -- up to 4 million jobs, but 1 million that are green jobs.  Could you define what that is?
MR. GIBBS:  Sure.  The President visited in this campaign a windmill manufacturer that produces -- it wouldn't even fit in this room -- turbine blades for windmills.  Those are green jobs.  We went to --
Q    But these jobs already -- how is he going to create a million of them -- the question is a million --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, hopefully we're going to build more windmills.  Hopefully the tax credit that goes through Congress -- you know, I don't want to get too deep into the weeds here -- no pun intended.  (Laughter.)  But, you know, each year, at least at the end of last year, you had tax credits for wind energy jobs -- there's a one-year tax credit, right.  And so the -- every year in August or September, there's a huge scurry to make sure that next year's tax credit is available.
Well, if you're going to build a windmill the size of which is going to produce energy to lower the power costs of millions of Americans, there's some lead time that's involved.  So in instituting a renewed tax credit in this economic stimulus bill to give the producers of wind energy some understanding of what's available for them to use in creating these jobs and to give them some economic certainty is important.
That's just one example.  I mean, we went to Ohio.  It all -- like I said, it all blurs together.  It seems -- it was probably only a couple weeks ago, a week and a half ago, where we went to a manufacturer for the turbine itself, not the blade.  You've got biofuel jobs.  You've got solar projects.  I think there's any number of clean energy jobs that can drive not only our path towards energy independence, but also a path towards creating jobs.
Sheryl.
Q    Robert, the President wants bipartisan support for his economic package.  House Republicans came here on Friday and they expressed concerns about the bill on tax policy and other matters.  So two questions.  First, specifically what changes is the President willing to make, if any, to accommodate the Republican concerns?  And also, how much -- how many Republican votes in your view would constitute bipartisan support?  Does he want half of all Republicans voting for it, a third, a tenth?  What is the level at which you can claim bipartisan support?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me take that part first.  And we went through a series of hypothetical situations on this, I think both Thursday and Friday.  I'm not going to prejudge an artificial limit one way or the other.  And I think it would be dangerous at any given point to start looking at the committee vote or a vote on this or that.  I will wait until we get to the end process on this.
Getting back to the meetings that you talked about.  The President got a letter last week from Republicans asking to come talk about their proposals, I think on Wednesday, and they came to the White House on Friday.  The President, as I told you all on Friday, will go to Capitol Hill tomorrow and speak separately to both the House and the Senate caucuses.  Again, to get input from them on what should be part of the bill.
There are already provisions in this bill relating to net operating loss, tax cuts, and other small business tax cuts that are directly related to suggestions that Republicans have given the economic team, the President of the United States, and other members of Congress that are now part of where we are now on an economic recovery and reinvestment plan.
As I said, this is a long and winding road, and it will go through this legislative process for a few more weeks before something hopefully gets soon to the President's desk.
But the President is very serious about this.  I think the jobs numbers today underscore -- or the job announcements today underscore the necessity that Washington not respond to the latest crisis simply by doing what Washington always does best and does more frequently, and that is get into too much of a back and forth and have important issues that the American people are concerned about become a political football.  That's why the President is willing and eager to go first to have Republican leaders and Democratic leaders here, and now to go talk only with Republican leaders tomorrow to seek their input.  And we hope that this is a process that will continue until the President has -- I'm sorry, until the bill goes through Congress and the President has something that he can sign.
Q    Would you describe tomorrow's as a negotiating session?  Or how is it different from Friday's session?
MR. GIBBS:  I think we might need more numbers on our side if it's a negotiation.
Q    What does your --
MR. GIBBS:  What's the goal?
Q    Yes.  And what do you want to come out of it?
MR. GIBBS:  The goal is to seek their input.  He wants to hear their ideas.  If there are good ideas -- and I think he assumes there will be -- that we will look at those ideas; that those ideas will go through a process in Congress; they'll be debated and voted on.
I mean, I don't -- I've worked in Congress some on and off for years, many of you probably have covered Congress more than I've worked there, but there is certainly -- this is a process that is -- originally I think there was some talk that there was going to a be a bill introduction on a Wednesday and a bill passage on a Friday, right.  This now is a process that's going through multiple committees.  There will be amendments to the bill.  This is a process that is ongoing.  The President seeks input from Democrats and Republicans.
And I think because of that bipartisan dialogue we'll create
a better economic plan for the American people when all is said and done.
Q    I want to talk to you about the al-Shihri case.  How much of a cautionary tale does the President find in the person released from Guantanamo in 2007, went through some sort of program to take the terrorist out of him, and he becomes part of a plot in Yemen that bombs a U.S. embassy.  As he's considering what is clearly representing to the American people a more lenient approach to detention releases than the Bush administration, how concerned is he over that --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's not do whatever.  If you want to rephrase that part of your question, I'll let you do that.
Q    A different standard from the Bush administration evaluating those to be dealt with by --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me deal with the answer to the question, because I -- we took a lot of questions on this last Thursday, "Why don't you have answers to all these questions," right?  Well, the answer to these questions are that a prudent review process will ultimately be put in place through these executive orders to determine exactly who is there, to determine their profile.  The Post had a story this weekend that mentioned that not everybody has a case file.  Those case files and information are in different places.  And a prudent process will be put in place to make prudent decisions.
I think there are -- there are admonitions of the al-Shihri case.  I think that is why you see, despite some criticism, this administration going through a deliberative process to ensure that the American people are safer.  That's the charge that he gave to his team.  And I think despite some criticism of not having all the answers -- the criticism is largely unfounded, because what we've done is put into place a process to answer those questions on the front end rather than on the back end.
Q    But if the case raises any doubts that no matter how good the process, you may not be able to effectively process these people in a way that continues to guarantee the American people's safety, whether it's here or a posting overseas?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the President has put in place what he believes is the strongest process to protect the American people, to protect our values, to protect the men and women that fight every day for our freedom.  He has confidence in that process.  I think there are certainly examples of why a process has been and is needed, and certainly the one you mentioned is -- I think is a good case for ensuring that that process be done in a deliberative and prudent way.
Q    When the President said, "I won," what did he mean by that?  And when he also told Republicans, If you allow Rush Limbaugh to affect debate, nothing gets done in this town.  What did he mean by those two statements?
MR. GIBBS:  I think the second is largely self-explanatory.
Q    He's live on the air right now.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Tell him I said "hi."  The first one -- and I think I've had this conversation, and I think Rahm has had this conversation with a few of you -- there were discussions about the exact composition of tax cuts, different types of tax cuts.  The President ran on a series of tax cuts that are -- some of which are and some of which aren't in the recovery and reinvestment plan.  Republicans had other tax cuts and ideas.
The President believes that the reason that he ran on these tax cuts is he believes this is the single best series of tax cuts to stimulate the economy, to put money into the pockets of middle-class Americans that have watched their wages decline over and over for the past several years.  There was a debate about what would constitute exactly those tax cuts, and the President said that he felt confident with the tax cuts that he'd run on, that the people had weighed in on what they thought might be a good way to stimulate the economy.  He said he won, and the next thing that happened is everybody laughed.
So this wasn't cowboy diplomacy.  This was I think a rather light-hearted moment in a meeting that he was pleased to host in order to have Democrats and Republicans talk extensively about their ideas for getting this economy moving again.
Q    Following up on the previous question a little more, what is his mind-set when he goes up there to see the Republicans?  You say he's seeking input, but is it more than that?  Is he -- there's a steady drumbeat coming from some Republicans now -- Boehner, Cantor, McCain -- that there have got to be some significant changes in this thing if he's going to get the kind of Republican support that he has said he wants.  Is he just seeking input, is he just open-minded, or is he going up there and saying, I'm ready to make some serious changes here to get you guys onboard?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think he is -- he's certainly open-minded and he's certainly energetic about doing it.  And I think he and his economic team continue to talk about ways that -- any way that can be used to improve the package.  We don't have pride of authorship.  We understand that this is a process of give and take in order to produce what the President believes is the strongest plan to get the economy going again.
So, you know, I think he's anxious to do this.  And again, if -- I think there's a very deliberative process whereby these ideas will be certainly discussed with the President and that will go through the process of being -- some of which will go through the process of being debated and voted on.  And I think the President believes that's the best way to get the strongest package for the American people.
Q    Will he make significant changes, if that's what it takes to get the Republicans onboard?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, we'll see what he hears tomorrow.
Q    Robert, on the banking, you just mentioned the additional $350 billion will be spent differently.  You know, the Hill appears to be bracing for a second request.  How close are you guys to making a second request, or are you going to wait until that $350 billion is entirely disbursed?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, let me go back to the question I think Chuck asked, which is, I think financial stability, financial regulation, additional measures to deal with foreclosure and bankruptcy are all things that the economic team are working on and that they'll get a decision on from the President of the United States.
I don't want to prejudge what the parameters might be or the decisions that might ultimately be made.  The President said that he would do everything in his power to ensure -- to ensure that the financial system doesn't collapse, and that's certainly what he's prepared to do.
Q    So without prejudging it, is there a second package even in the works?
MR. GIBBS:  There's a series of proposals to be put in front of the President in order to address the financial stability of our economy.
Q    Does the President believe there is a sincere attempt on the Republicans' part to negotiate this in good faith?  Their proposal relies very heavily on tax cuts, little, if any, on direct spending.  Does the President -- is there common ground here?  Can the Republicans be accommodated, or is this, to some degree, some Kabuki theater we're seeing here?
MR. GIBBS:  I think the President is genuinely serious about this.  I don't think that he would have had leaders come down here on Friday or go up for several hours tomorrow on Capitol Hill if he wasn't genuinely sincere about hearing their cares and concerns.
The President put forward with his economic team a series of principles and a framework that combined both tax cuts for families, tax cuts for small businesses -- I think one out of every six dollars in there right now is tax cuts for businesses -- but also direct spending to create jobs, to create private-sector jobs.  And I think the President -- the President believes that through that, we have a balance that he feels will save or create 3 to 4 million jobs and get the economy moving again.
I think the President has often said, though, there's not one single thing that will get -- that any group can do to get the economy moving as a whole, or we'd likely have done that already, but a series of mechanisms along with some of the proposals that will still come to the President's desk from his team.  The President believes that we've struck, at least to this point, a pretty good balance and that we need some -- we're going to need some direct spending in order to create those jobs.
I was asked last week about monetary policy.  You know, we've fired most of the bullets in that gun and now we are at a point where we need a fiscal stimulus, and that's what the President set out to do.
Q    Thank you.  I heard both you and the President talk about the urgency of moving on these environmental matters.  My question is whether you're also concerned about the impact that that may have on the domestic automakers and whether, because of that concern, you're considering any direct aid.  For instance, when he was in the Senate, Mr. Obama sponsored this health care for hybrids bill, and I'm wondering if that kind of idea is still on the table, or anything else.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President wants to look through that.  Obviously we care deeply about the health -- the life and the health of the auto industry, and parts suppliers.  And we'll hear more this week I'm sure in the news as we go through about financial troubles as it relates to parts suppliers and payments and things like that.
And I think many of you again heard the President talk about this during the campaign.  We needed to take some swift action.  But whether it was a proposal in the Senate or speech that he gave in Detroit -- he coupled that with help for the auto industry -- I think he understands that that's likely to take place.
And I think it's important to as we talk about -- I talked extensively about the fuel mileage standards -- the second executive order or the first one -- I don't know the order -- like I say, I haven't gotten emails, so I don't know -- the waiver as it relates to California -- as most of you know California has an exemption in the Clean Air Act to deal with new problems largely unique to a state of that size in dealing with some of its pollution problems.  They asked for a waiver, and the waiver was denied by the previous administration's EPA in 2007.
What the President did today was start a process to instruct the EPA not to do some thing, but to start a process to reevaluate that; that he believes that principles of sound judgment and sound science should come ahead of the dictum of the President of the United States in directing an agency to do one thing or another.  But even in that process, there's a -- you'll hear from all the stakeholders; you'll hear from California and the other states that want to mimic what California has proposed, and you'll hear from the auto industry.
And I think what ultimately we'll come up with is something that moves along the twin goals of ensuring a strong manufacturing sector while at the same time ensuring that we take the necessary steps to reduce our dependence on foreign oil.
Q    But given that there's already been billions of dollars committed to the auto industry just last month, does the Obama administration believe that more money is needed to help them deal with this?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, obviously we've got some -- there's some statutory deadlines coming up as it relates to the auto industry later in February that I don't want to get far ahead of.
Q    I mean specifically tied to this.
MR. GIBBS:  I'll wait until we get a little farther into the process of the auto industry.
Helen.
Q    Why is the President sending more troops -- wants to send more troops to Afghanistan to kill people?
MR. GIBBS:  In the campaign the President talked about the fact that we had largely taken our eye off the ball in Afghanistan and moved direct resources to Iran -- I'm sorry, to Iraq, to fight there.  We've seen in that intervening time a significant deterioration in the situation in Afghanistan and along the border.  I think the President has said that many of the people are the same people that planned terror attacks in this country, are alive and well likely in those hills planning more.
Q    How does he know that?
MR. GIBBS:  That's told to me and told to many of the American people through intelligence reports and good reporting.
The President has started a process with Secretary Gates, with the chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, with military commanders in the individual countries of Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as the wider region, to evaluate our posture as it relates to Afghanistan.  He said during the campaign that we ought to move additional troops to Afghanistan --
Q    Why?
MR. GIBBS:  Because we have a very dangerous situation there.  Because we've got, as I said, terrorists that planned horrific acts here in 2001 --
Q    You mean they're going to come here and bomb us?
MR. GIBBS:  -- likely planning again.  We're going to ensure the safety of the American people and make sure that Afghanistan doesn't deteriorate any further.
Yes, sir.
Q    Does the President feel that it's possible that he can reduce the amount of spending in the stimulus bill?  A lot of the Republicans are talking about less spending, but he started at $775 billion total, now you're up to $825 billion, with $550 billion for spending.  Does he --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think we talked about a range of -- we started with a -- well, I think many, many, many, many, months ago we started -- some started with a range of about $300 billion.  The range I think we talked about was -- there was a $100 billion range.
Q    Is he willing to come down on the numbers is what I'm asking.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think -- and I think Dr. Summers spoke to this point yesterday on "Meet the Press" -- that he feels that the range of funding that we have now is an appropriate range, both in overall number and in order to get the economy moving again.  You know, we can tinker under the hood with some of the specifics, but I think right now the broad range is a number that he feels comfortable with.
Q    But that's not something that's negotiable with the Republicans at this point?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think you've seen many economists say we need more.  Some people have said we need less.  Something tells me ending up somewhere in between is probably the right area.
Maura.
Q    On TARP you've said several times now that you were going to ensure that the money is actually used to lend.  Could you go a little bit further on that?  Is your thinking tending to the encouraged side or the required side?  And how are you going to --
MR. GIBBS:  Again, I don't want to get ahead of the economic team, but suffice to say the reports today, and not as -- the reports today were empirical.  I think the evidence that we had previously was what you suspected was reported today, in that that is that a lot places that are receiving these funds aren't using them to unclog the financial system and get credit and capital flowing to businesses and families.
Q    But they haven't decided yet what tool do you need to use to get that lending to happen?
MR. GIBBS:  None of those final decisions have been made; understanding, though, that as we begin to use that money, that we will do this in a way that's markedly different than the way we've done it in the past.
Q    And just one more thing about the stimulus.  Is he committed to defending the proportion of tax cuts versus spending in this package?  In other words, the other day when Peter Orszag sent that letter, he said he concluded it was 75 percent spend-out in a year and a half, and that included the tax cuts that -- how he got the 75 percent.  Does that mean that you're committed to fighting to keep that proportion of tax cuts as a minimum in the package?
MR. GIBBS:  Without getting into some of the push and pull of the numbers, let me state clearly what Peter said.  And I think that's what -- that's why the administration believes strongly that the initial CBO report that looked at a very small amount of the stimulus bill at a point in the process that we weren't in when the report was released -- and that is that at a minimum, 75 percent of that money will be spent out over an 18-month period of time.  That's what the President feels is at a level comfortable with moving that money out the door and getting this economy moving again.
The numbers inside of those I think mean less than the promise to get whatever that proportion is out the door quickly for either projects, small businesses, or families to get some life injected back into the --
Q    But as he tries to get Republican support -- I mean, he is -- you're now stating that the tax cuts in there are stimulative, and they need to be in there in order to have the effects that you want.  Is he committed to defending --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, we definitely believe that those tax cuts are stimulative, yes.
Q    Right.  But is he committed to defending the proportion of tax cuts that you now have in the package?  Is that a minimum for you?
MR. GIBBS:  I think he will get a chance to both defend and discuss tomorrow with the Republicans what exactly that is.  And I think he looks forward, as I've said earlier, to doing that, to doing it in a way that gets the American people the type of package that we need to get the economy moving again.
Chris.
Q    Robert, on the announcements this morning, did the President consult with former Vice President Gore at all in shaping his plan?  And is there an official or an unofficial role for the former Vice President in this idea?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't have anything on any discussions particularly with former Vice President Gore.  I think some of the announcements shaped today were shaped today -- and I'm sure the former Vice President has always been part of longer discussions relating to energy independence and climate change.
You know, the President ran on a package that increased fuel economy standards.  As I said earlier, this wasn't just something he did in the Senate; this was a speech that he did in Detroit in front of the auto companies relating to that.  I think he's talked about the need to ensure that science and fact are followed rather than political ideology.  And I think that's why he believes that the EPA reconsidering the decision that was made is one -- is a process that is -- that's right to do.
Ken.
Q    I wonder, on Iraq, if you could characterize the response you're getting from the military so far, particularly the implementers and architects of the current policy, toward the 16-month plan -- particularly General Petraeus.  I mean, what -- how are they reacting now that he's in office and this is the policy that they developed themselves?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, as I talked about last week, the process began I think last Wednesday in the Situation Room with the Vice President and the National Security Advisor, the Joint Chiefs, the commander of our -- of Central Command, General Petraeus, where the President outlined that new mission for Iraq.
The process is ongoing, as I talked to Helen about.  The President and the Secretary of Defense have outlined a process.  We at some point in the next few days -- originally it was going to be yesterday, but the Secretary is -- has something else that intrudes on tomorrow -- the next step in that process will be going to meet directly with commanders and planners at the Pentagon.  We'll also sit down with General McKiernan to discuss specifically Afghanistan.
The charge related to Iraq is, as I've said here before, which is to remove our combat brigades responsibly and safely; to ensure that it's done in a way that doesn't put them into increased harm; that puts the onus and responsibility on the Iraqis to take some control over the security and the political situation in their country -- but to do so in a way that seeks direct input from those commanders, and that only through that entire process, and after that entire process is done, will we -- will the President of the United States make a final decision as it relates to Iraq, Afghanistan, and (inaudible).
Mark.
Q    Robert, in the effort to reduce dependence on foreign oil, does the President believe or support expanded production domestically of oil?
MR. GIBBS:  He said that during the campaign, yes.
Q    And he stands by that?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, he does.
April.
Q    Thank you, Robert.  Robert, is it realistic for the number, 1 million green jobs, to be out there, as consumers are not opting for solar and wind power because they're saying it's too costly and the benefits are not for decades to come?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, the President visited projects throughout the campaign.  We visited a project a week and a half ago in Ohio.  Ohio is a state that I think many of you have seen about and read about in terms of, the economic devastation that we've seen throughout the country has hit extremely hard in a place like Ohio.  We visited a company that, lo and behold, had actually hired workers that week because of an increased demand.  The President believes that the price of oil and the price of energy is not likely to stay at the level it is now.  It wasn't long ago that we were all paying $4 for a gallon of gas -- I remember driving to the airport in Chicago and it was between $4.50 and $4.60.  I don't think it's going to stay where it is long.
We can make the investments necessary and meet the demand in a growing economy for clean energy that reduces that dependence on foreign oil, while at the same time creates a million new clean energy jobs.  I think those are -- it's not only a worthy goal; the President believes that's a goal that can and will be met.
Q    Thank you.
MR. GIBBS:  Thanks, guys.
Q    Thank you, Robert.
Q    Robert, that week ahead you promised?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, that week ahead -- the week ahead I promised unfortunately fell victim to somebody and our email system.  I will endeavor to, one, fix the email system -- (laughter) -- and two, if I can't do it audibly today, then we will certainly send out an email for guidance.  I know the biggest event tomorrow will be his trip to Capitol Hill.
Q    What time is that?
MR. GIBBS:  I believe he leaves here at noon, and I think he's up there --
Q    Is it four separate meetings or two?
MR. GIBBS:  It's two separate meetings, as I understand it.
Q    So the Senate Republican Caucus, House Republican Caucus --
MR. GIBBS:  I think the House is first, if I'm not mistaken, and then we go to the Senate side.
Q    Not the Democratic caucuses?
MR. GIBBS:  No, just the Republican caucuses.
Q    Did President issue any statement on the (inaudible) of India?
MR. GIBBS:  We have -- we have a statement, again, I'm using the -- there's only one email system at the White House at a time, and unfortunately it's not working.  (Laughter.)  So we will -- I will get that out to you, and --
Q    Greetings from 1 billion press people --
Q    Robert, on Geithner --
MR. GIBBS:  A good way to end, thank you.
Q    Can you just say ahead of the Geithner vote -- sorry, if my colleagues wanted to leave, but there's been some jest, but also in seriousness, that if Wesley Snipes had been nominated Secretary of Treasury he wouldn't be in jail right now.  I'm just wondering, ahead of the Geithner vote today, is President Obama --
MR. GIBBS:  You can't imagine the number of prospective answers that's currently going through my mind.  (Laughter.)  I think it is safe to say that --
Q    But, no --
MR. GIBBS:  I think it's safe --
Q    But is the President asking the IRS to be more lenient to all Americans in the future when they say, "I didn't know, but I'm sorry"?
MR. GIBBS:  Wow, this is one of those questions that can certainly get me in trouble.  Secretary-designate Geithner -- who I believe in a few hours we'll be able to call Secretary Geithner because of a strong bipartisan vote in the Senate -- admitted that he'd made honest mistakes that could and should have been avoided.  He made amends by paying the back taxes and the interest that he owes.
The President also believes that he has a unique -- unique experience, unique intelligence, and a unique background to tackle the economic crises that we face right now as a country and throughout the world, that he will be a tremendous leader to our economic team, and somebody that I think Americans will value having on their side as we try to turn this economy around and get people working again.  We look forward to that vote happening, to having a strong bipartisan record -- on record with a strong bipartisan vote tonight.  And if it's done at the time we think it is we may have -- we may go swear in a new Secretary of Treasury soon.
Thanks, guys.
                                END                 2:32 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 1/27/09

Press Briefing by Press Secretary Robert Gibbs

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
3:52 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS:  All right.  Just a couple of quick things before we get started.  The President will make a couple of calls to foreign leaders later this afternoon:  to Prime Minister Rudd in Australia and to President Uribe in Colombia.  The President is also pleased that the House has passed the Lilly Ledbetter Pay Equity Bill, and we'll have some more information -- I'm finally prepared to do the week ahead schedule; better late than never, right?  (Laughter.)
Q    Which week?  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  I can tell you the inaugural is the 20th.  (Laughter.)  We'll go back and do some of that toward the end of this.
Q    The bill signing -- you'll let us know when -- is what you're trying to say --
MR. GIBBS:  You're getting a little ahead of me -- but (inaudible) said, thank you, yes.
I don't have any more announcements, so I'm happy to dive in and take some of your questions.  Yes.
Q    A couple of different ways to get at these meetings today.  Did the President come away with any specific reason to think that the Republicans will support the stimulus package?  And the flip side of that, was there anything specific that he agreed to put in the bill to help bring along more support, or at the request of Republicans?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me take the second part first.  I know that throughout both meetings -- first on the House, and then on the Senate -- the Senate side -- the President listened to a number of proposals, members of Congress had envelopes with ideas in them that they talked about and gave to both the President and to Larry Summers, who was with us at the meetings.
I do think there is a genuine sense of cooperation that was involved in the meetings.  I think we will have Republican support for this bill; I think you'll have some when the House passes this bill hopefully on Wednesday.  But again, I think this is a process that will wind its way through.  I don't think today was the beginning or the end, but just part of that process.
The message that the President brought today, and the same message I think that Republicans have when they met -- we all see the statistics that come out once a month about where the employment numbers are or consumer confidence which is low or housing numbers that while slightly better are still far different than they were just a year ago, and we can get caught up into acronyms and all that kind of stuff.
But I think yesterday was a day that crystallized how important this economic crisis is.  Just yesterday, 20,000 people -- announced 20,000 layoffs at Caterpillar; 8,000 at Sprint Nextel; 8,000 at Microsoft; 8,000 as a result of the merger between Pfizer and Wyeth; 7,000 at Home Depot; 3,400 from Texas Instruments; and 2,000 from General Motors -- just yesterday.  The President's message both yesterday and today is that we cannot sit idly by, we have to act, and that that action should not become part of what Washington always does best, which is play politics.
And the President asked each member of the House and the Senate caucus to simply evaluate his plan and his proposal not through a political lens, but simply through a "what works" economic lens.  And I think as members look through that economic "what works" lens, they'll understand that this plan is unique among legislation that Congress considers, in terms of openness and transparency; spending projects will be on the -- on a website so people can evaluate what happening; that there is a mix, an appropriate mix of tax cuts that will put money back into people's pockets, into the pockets of small business owners, as well as direct federal spending that creates jobs; that all of those together, that the economic team and Congress has put together, a balanced package that will put people back to work.
Q    Let me just follow up, then.  Based on the description you just gave of the discussion, it doesn't sound like a brass tacks discussion.  It sounds like what the President was doing was making an argument for the existing bill, not making an argument for how can we change this bill.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the President started -- well, let me describe what actually happened.  The President started each of the meetings by letting folks know the decisions that he'd gone through, the process that he'd gone through in talking to economists and economic thinkers, both left and right, both Democrat and Republican, both people that had supported him in the campaign and people who had supported his opponent, in putting together what he believed was not an ideologically driven package but a package that he and the economic team felt was best needed at this moment in time to put people back to work.
He wanted to start by that, and each one had a healthy Q&A back and forth about ideas that people had or criticisms that people had, and he still seeks their input.  And this may be somewhat unique in this town to watch the President of the United States go up to Capitol Hill, but I don't -- it may be the first in our seven-day-old presidency, but I can assure you it won't be the last time the President goes up to talk to members of Congress and seek their input on something as important as getting our economy going.
Q    But what you're talking about, and what you say the President talked about, seems more aspirational.  And to judge by the public --
MR. GIBBS:  We do aspire to pass a strong bill.  (Laughter.)
Q    In the manner which you've just discussed.  But the public comments we hear are quite predictable.  Democrats are accused by Republicans of larding it up and ramming it down the throats of the Republicans.  Republicans are concerned that there's far too much stimulus and not enough tax cut.  And I don't hear -- I don't --
MR. GIBBS:  I hope the problem we have is there's too much stimulus.  I think there's a lot of people yesterday that got pink slips at companies that hope there's too much stimulus.
Q    I don't hear anything from either side which suggests that there is compromise in the works.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President listened to ideas.  He's asked the economic team to evaluate them.  I know in the Senate they talked about infrastructure spending, they talked about different things that the President wants to evaluate.  Again, you know, this is -- the clock is not at zero, guys.  This is the process that continues.
You know, I think the President went up there in a true spirit of bipartisanship to seek input.  I'll leave it aside that some members of the leadership invited the President to come up and announced their position on the bill before he got there.  But he was anxious to talk to members from across the country about what they see in their districts and what they are hearing from their constituents.
And I think that -- I think it's a process that we're happy to be part of and I think one that will result in a bill that's in the best interests of the American people.
Q    Are you hearing from members that they're willing to discuss this, to make concessions, to --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President talked about some ideas today and he'll have the economic team evaluate them and we'll go through this, through the process.
Jeff.
Q    Robert, the President talked today on the Hill about his concerns, again, about banks' troubled assets and about the multi-legged stool.  When will he decide what to do about those assets?  Will he be asking Congress for more money?  And he also said credit needs to get flowing again.  What else does he believe, or does the White House believe needs to be done for that?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, it's a good question, Jeff, because the President said, and I think both members on the -- Republican members on the House and the Senate side -- talked about and understand that the stimulus or the economic recovery plan is just one part of a series of things that have to happen, a financial stability package, some regulation of the financial industry to ensure that this type of thing never happens again.  And it was remarkable listening to that.
There is a consensus that one thing alone is certainly not going to do it, and if we don't begin to do these things in concert with each other -- meaning the proposals -- that we're not going to enjoy an economic recovery.
The President met with -- as part of his economic daily briefing -- with Secretary Geithner and Dr. Summers for about 50 minutes today in the Oval Office.  They talked about economic news, they talked about the recovery, and I believe the economic team continues to be in the process of putting together some ideas.  I know that Secretary Geithner today released some guidelines about the TARP and how lobbying relates to that.
This is a process that the economic team is working through.  Like I said, it took up -- I think the meeting was on the schedule for 15 minutes, and the meeting went 50.  So I know they are active discussions, because again, everybody understands that it's not just going to be one thing that fixes this economy or one thing that gets the economy growing and moving again, it's a series of things.
Q    But can we assume that that's going to mean asking for more money?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again I don't -- I think it would be unhelpful to assume based on the fact that the decisions haven't been made yet by the President.  Again, I'll restate what I've said a number of times from here:  The President will do what is necessary to ensure first and foremost that there's not an economic collapse.  But I think everybody understands that we're going to have to do a lot to get the economy moving again.
I know the President -- and particularly on the Senate side, there was a lot of talk about financial stability and understanding that we're in a unique moment whereby it's not just one problem that confronts the economy, that it's a series of very complex but also interwoven problems that are going to all have to be dealt with in order to get the economy moving again.
Q    Robert, you mentioned that the President asked members to evaluate his plan and proposal.  Where is that specific plan?  We haven't actually seen a document that lays all of this out.  It seems like it's sort of a provision --
MR. GIBBS:  I think it's on the House side.
Q    -- provisions are coming in, coming out -- they're going to vote on it tomorrow.  And you talked about posting it on the Internet so the American people can evaluate the whole -- when will that --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, we talked in the campaign about once a bill had come through the process before he signed it that the bill would be put on the Internet in order for the American people to be able to evaluate it.  I think -- I'm unfamiliar with how the House does this, but I know the -- I think the bill goes to the Rules Committee tomorrow, and there should be copies of that legislation there.
The President -- let me give you an example, going back to some of your earlier questions about cooperation with Republicans on the bill.  One of the very first things that then-President-Elect Obama did when he went to Capitol Hill I think the 4th or 5th of January was sit down with the bipartisan leadership in the House and Senate and talk about ideas.  One of the very first ideas that was given to him by the Whip in the House, Eric Cantor, was, let's put everything on the Internet so that people can see where this money is going for and how we do on these projects.  And that's going to happen.
So I think this -- the notion that somehow there's one party only, one party involved, or people aren't working together to get this thing done, I don't think matches what's actually happening in this process.  That's why we're happy to do it.
Q    The Congressional Budget Office has a new analysis out in the last 24 hours saying that about 66 percent of the current plan, it's current form, it's a moving target, would stimulate the economy within 18 months.  You've said and vowed that it will be 75 percent.  How do you square that circle?  And secondly, CBO is saying that the real cost of this is not $825 billion; it's $1.1 to 1.2 trillion, they're telling Congressman Boehner, because of the interest costs.  So what is the real price tag of this?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the real price tag is how much the plan costs right now -- I think the plan is $825 billion.
Q    -- cost is really $1.1 to 1.2 trillion.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I'm not an economist, and, I mean, when you bought your house, how much did you -- when the little piece of paper said your house was however much it was, I don't think they factored in the 30-year cost of your loan.  But I'll leave that for mortgage brokers throughout the country to discuss.
Q    That's why we had the bailout.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, I was going to say, if he wants to declare foreclosure we can deal with it just around the corner. (Laughter.)
So, you know --
Q    -- 66 percent, but you say 75 percent, so --
MR. GIBBS:  First of all, let's mark some progress since the first time this question was asked a few days ago and I said that, one, if the CBO will take a wider scope of the bill you'd find a much larger and much faster payout of that money -- and that's now become evident and obvious.  As you said in your question -- and I don't remember the exact phraseology -- but, again, they're evaluating this particular piece of legislation.  I think the spend-out rates will be evaluated and the Senate bill will be even faster.
The President is committed to at least 75 percent of that money being spent out over 18 months, so that the money that is -- the taxpayer money that's spent gets quickly into this economy to create and save millions of jobs and get this place going again.
I think that's the test that will be met.  I'm happy and we're happy that CBO, as I said, has widened its lens to look at not just one narrow aspect of a piece of legislation from a few days ago or at the beginning of the process -- but again, that wider lens and where it is now.  I think we're making progress on that.
Q    At the meeting today Congressman Pence, among others, expressed concern that they had been shutout of this process when it comes to negotiation on Capitol Hill.  Does the President think that Speaker Pelosi and Chairman Obey have been bipartisan the way he likes to hold out bipartisanship as a goal?
MR. GIBBS:  You know, Dick, I have not been in meetings about the stimulus bill.  I can only talk most substantively about the viewpoint of the President and his involvement in this.  And I think on any number of occasions -- whether it's going up there when he was President-elect, whether it's bringing a group down here last week, whether it's going back up there today -- that the President believes honestly that we can put something together with input from both parties that will most benefit the American people.
Q    But is he, for want of a better word, leaning on Speaker Pelosi and Chairman Obey and others to be more bipartisan?  You're probably not going to get more than a dozen Republican votes tomorrow -- that's hardly bipartisan.
MR. GIBBS:  You know, I think we've all seen votes in this town where a few Republicans sometimes are hard to come by or a few Democrats are hard to come by.  We'll take what we can get tomorrow.  I think the most important thing about tomorrow is keeping this process going.  Because again, the American people deserve a process that understands the severity of the crisis that they're involved in, not to get involved in some "Animal House"-type food fight on Capitol Hill about what's going to happen up there.
I think what's most important is that we move this process along.  The President was willing to go up there today and do what he can to help move that process along and get something quickly for the American people.
Ed.
Q    Robert, to the President's way of thinking, do the rhetoric and actions of Democrats and Republicans so far meet his idea of change, or would he like to see additional change?
MR. GIBBS:  You know, I think he was -- I think he was heartened by a couple of particular things that happened in the meetings today.  I don't remember the exact House member, but several said that they were appreciative of the tone that he had brought to Washington.  Actually, one of them was Peter Roskam, a colleague of his from Springfield, who is now a member of Congress from Illinois -- and others who mentioned that they were appreciative of, as I said, the tone that he had brought to Washington, the willingness to seek their opinions and to listen to what they had to say.  And Congressman Pence was -- ended the meeting by saying that the door to the Republican conference was always open if the President ever wanted to come talk to them again.  I think that's something that he'll continue to do.  Again, I don't -- this may be the first time in our illustrious seven-day presidency that we've traveled --
Q    Eight.
MR. GIBBS:  Is it eight?  (Laughter.)  You know, I'm going to -- you need a sign, because I've now messed that up on three different days -- that we'll go back up there and seek their advice.
Yes.
Q    How does the President feel?
MR. GIBBS:  The President feels like we're making progress.  The President feels -- the President feels like we're -- we are on track to meet what he hopes is a President's Day deadline to get something moving.  The President also feels, again, that yesterday's numbers make the job of members of Congress, of members of this administration, and of him, to act quickly; that we can't delay, that we need to get stimulus into this economy; that the more we delay, the more people are going to lose their jobs, the less impact that this is going to have quickly.  He believes we're on track to do that.  He's happy that the tone that has been set is the right one.  I think he looks forward to continuing to work with members of both parties and looks forward to having everybody down here to sign an economic recovery plan when it happens.
Chuck.
Q    Robert, can you explain why the President made the decision to call Chairman Waxman to get the contraceptive thing yanked out of the stimulus?
MR. GIBBS:  The President called Chairman Waxman yesterday and said that while he believed that the policy of increased funding for family planning was the right one, that he didn't believe that this bill was the vehicle to make that happen.
Q    And going back -- is the President concerned that he's being used as a political wedge?  Because it was a parade of House Republicans that came out and said, you know, he's -- you know, Speaker Pelosi is not listening to us, he's listening to us.  Is he concerned that he's being used as a political weapon?
MR. GIBBS:  If the President becomes a walking comment box that gets an economic recovery plan faster into the American economic bloodstream, then my guess is they'll have to fill up the cars and we'll drive up there a lot more often.
Mark.
Q    New subject?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, sir.
Q    Karl Rove's attorney wants to know what the White House Counsel thinks about whether Rove is still covered by executive privilege in a subpoena that he received yesterday from the House Judiciary Committee.
MR. GIBBS:  Some of my staff has talked to the White House Counsel and the Office of White House Counsel is studying those issues and will advise us when they have a recommendation.  I don't have anything, at this point, more than that.
Major.
Q    Robert, as you said, on the Senate side there was curiosity and dialogue with the President about the financial stability package.  As you said, there will be many legs to the stool.  I know it seems a bit tedious, but some of the senators came away with the impression there is going to be a second request, separate from TARP, for the financial industry.  Are they mistaken in that impression?  And is there any economic data that the economic team has brought to the President in the last week that would suggest there isn't a need for some kind of rescue?
MR. GIBBS:  Good try -- (laughter) -- in asking me the same question for three days, but in a different way, to prove the other side.
The discussion and the dialogue with the Senate Republicans, again, I think centered around sort of two basic principles as it related to financial stability:  less -- I don't remember a lot of specific discussion about exact funding levels, but two discussions that were had, one was, again, the need to -- primarily to make sure that this happened quickly.  That -- look, I think everybody in that room --
Q    I'm missing the first two.
MR. GIBBS:  Ideas on how to use the next money differently than the previous money.  I think everybody in that room feels like what was brought to them last September and executed neither lived up to what the Treasury Department said they were going to try to do, and certainly didn't execute in any way progress that we've seen that's moved credit and lending along.
There was also discussion again of you have a little bit of a circular problem here.  If you don't -- and the reason I think that they talked about this is you have to deal with both parts of these problem -- parts of this problem, and that is, if somebody doesn't have a job, they're not going to be borrowing money, right?  So the lending that we have to have happened to get the economy moving is hard to do if somebody doesn't have a job.  It's hard to make the decision to borrow $25,000 to send somebody to college if you don't have any hopes of ever paying that off.
So, again, this was discussed as it relates to ensuring that we have both a new way of spending the money that's been appropriated by the Senate -- and I think everyone is eager to see that that changes -- and secondly, to ensure that it works in concert with the reinvestment and recovery plan to get the economy moving again.
Q    Following up on the stimulus, clearly with the contraceptive decision the President is open to revising some component parts of the stimulus.
MR. GIBBS:  I think that's accurate.
Q    And to pick up on the phrase you used before, look at the whole package through the lens of what's economically productive, does the President believe -- some other spending has been criticized:  $200 million for the National Mall, $44 million to spruce up the exterior of the Agriculture Department.
MR. GIBBS:  Let's talk about the Mall for a second.
Q    Okay.
MR. GIBBS:  Let's talk about the Mall for a second.
Q    Are those things also economically stimulative?
MR. GIBBS:  Let's talk about the Mall for a second.  When we met on the first day of our presidency, we were on the Mall, right?  One point eight million people stood on the Mall, which happens to be the most visited national park that we have, right?  I think that you can make a very credible case -- and the economic team has -- that reconditioning the National Mall will create jobs, probably through spending in small businesses.  I saw editorials over the weekend, you know, "How is hiring cops stimulative?"  Well, if you're about to fire cops, then hiring cops is stimulative.  It's putting people back to work.
I think that -- forgetting for a second that you can look at 2/100ths of one percent of a piece of legislation and come up with some critique, leaving aside the other -- I can't even do the math that quickly -- 99-plus percent, the President believes that we have a package that is balanced, that puts people -- that puts money into people's pockets and create jobs.  There's no doubt that in today's meetings there were members that simply don't want to spend any federal money -- none.  Right?  But I think you have a hard economic argument to make that paving a road or fixing a bridge or building a wind turbine or laying a power grid doesn't create jobs.  I think you'd have a hard time arguing that.  When we speed down the interstate and it says, "slow, workers ahead" -- those are jobs.
I think the spending in this bill will create jobs, it'll put people back to work, it'll get this economy moving again.  Some people might not want to do that.  The President believes we face an economic crisis that doesn't allow us the option to turn our back on that happening.
Michael.
Q    Robert, the President today urged the Republicans on the Hill to put aside politics.  And you repeated something like that earlier today, which I guess means potentially to support the program, despite the fact that it might have political implications that are bad for them or their own party.  Is there anything in the bill, in the proposal, that is bad for the Democratic Party or bad for President Obama politically, that he will take a dose of his own medicine in a sense?
MR. GIBBS:  Look, I think the way the President evaluates the bill is whether or not it's going to get this economy moving again.  Look, we're all involved in what we hope is a process, and what we believe is a process that will get the economy moving again.  We probably don't have many more shots at this.  I think -- my hunch is you could find members of Congress that were not happy with the President's decision to call Congressman Waxman yesterday and ask that that money, albeit good policy, not be in this bill.
I don't doubt that there are things on each side of this that people might not altogether like.  But again, instead of focusing on 2/100ths of one percent of a piece of legislation, let's look at the 98/100ths of the 99 percent of the legislation and understand that it's going to get this economy moving again.
And I think the President believes that we'll all be in political trouble if we don't get people back to work.  We're all in a big boat, and we're all having to row.  And if we don't get the boat safely to shore, we're all going to be in trouble.  That's I think the evaluation that he hopes members of Congress make in looking at this -- again, not through a political lens, not through a philosophical lens, but instead through a lens at what will work and what will get this economy moving again.
Sheryl.
Q    Robert, I'm wondering if the President came away with a different feeling from Senate Republicans than he came away with from House Republicans today.  Does he feel that Senate Republicans are any more sympathetic to his point of view?  And when you talk about moving the ball forward, is what you're really saying, let's get this bill into the Senate where there may be a little bit different dynamic?
MR. GIBBS:  No, when I refer to that I just mean let's move this along in a legislative process.  Again, I don't -- when it passes the House and when it passes the Senate it's not likely to be identical.  So that's -- even those two acts aren't going to, in and of itself, be the end of the process.
I think in terms of the mood, I don't -- I didn't talk to him specifically, I don't believe he came away with markedly different impressions from the group.  Again, I think the Senate discussion probably spent a lot -- probably spent more time on different legs of that three-legged stool than just the recovery.  But I don't think he got any overall different vibe from what was going on.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, can you tell us about tomorrow's session at the Pentagon, whether this is for the Chiefs to brief the President or for the President to sort of chart the way ahead in terms of Iraq, Afghanistan?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, and I'll give some details when we go through the week ahead.  But as I've said before, the President began on the 21st of January a process of a new mission in Iraq.  And the Secretary of Defense and others laid out a process by which he would hear from all of those that were involved.  In fact, the Secretary was very clear on this in the meeting, that his goal was to put him in front of all the people that are involved in these decisions and all the people that are involved in committing the lives of men and women in our uniform so that the President can get all this advice in an unvarnished way.
That process that started at the beginning of this administration continues tomorrow at the Pentagon.  I think they'll talk about a number of issues.  Obviously one of them will be Iraq and Afghanistan.
He'll also, again, at some point have a meeting similar to the one we had on the 21st with -- that will involve General McKiernan, to talk specifically about Afghanistan.  But throughout this process, the President has laid down the test of ensuring that he hears specifically from both those on the ground and in the region before he makes decisions on our force posture going forward.
Q    The way you describe it, it sounds like he's expecting a fair amount of skepticism tomorrow.
MR. GIBBS:  Oh, I don't think that's true.  I mean, I think -- I think he's -- I think he looks forward to hearing their opinions.  I think he -- he's laid out that there will be a new mission in Iraq.  He said it throughout the campaign and he said it the -- on the 21st of January in the Situation Room here.  We are now going to go through a process to make a decision to responsibly remove those combat troops, to protect the soldiers that we have there, to provide more -- to give the opportunity for more responsibility for the Iraqi government and to listen to all those involved as we do it.
I think he looks forward to going over there and to listening to what they have to say.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, thank you.  Last night the President talked in his interview with Al Arabiya about the Israelis and the Palestinians having to make hard choices.  Can you elaborate on what some of those hard choices are for each side?  And for the President's part -- I know you went over this a day or so ago -- is he going to have to really deal with the reality on the ground that either he or, through Senator Mitchell, is actually going to have to talk to Hamas?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me not get too far ahead of where Senator Mitchell is on his trip.  I think the President during the campaign and throughout the transition has talked about what's required of everybody involved.  Obviously -- I think many of us know, without enumerating the individual choices, what issues lay before us.
But let me -- I want to talk for a second -- step back a little bit and talk about the interview itself.  I think the President believed that this was an opportunity to show the world that he would be personally involved and engaged in seeking long-lasting peace in the Middle East.  I think he used the opportunity to discuss with a broad section of the world, the Muslim world, that the United States is not its enemy, that the aspirations that we all have for our children are likely the same aspirations that they have for their children in seeking opportunity and a better way of life.
And I think it was an important message that the world receive as Senator Mitchell was embarking on his first trip, and what we assume will be one of many in a very, very long process -- but it was important for the President, as he said during the transition, to become involved and engaged in this from the very first day of his presidency, as he did in making calls to foreign leaders in the region.  And he'll be actively involved as we go forward.
Q    To follow up, does that mean he is going to be talking to other media like Al Jazeera and other -- I mean, it's self-serving perhaps, because it's where I'm from -- (laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Perhaps.
Q    But I want to know.
MR. GIBBS:  Listen, let me do this.  Let me make sure that the rest of -- what remains of my briefing doesn't turn into an individual interview request, because I can only imagine I'm going to need someone to get a spreadsheet and we'll go from there.
So I think what people can take from that interview is that you have a President that is willing to reach out and talk to the Muslim world to ensure that they know that the aspirations that he has for them are what they have for themselves and what they have for their children.  I think that's important.
Q    Robert, in addition to asking the Democrats in Congress to drop the family planning money, has the President or the White House asked them to drop anything else from this proposal as it moves past the House?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't know of any other calls that the President has made about that today, no.
Maura.
Q    Several House Republicans said that in the meeting President Obama said he was not inclined to compromise any further on the tax cuts, is that correct?  And also --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I saw -- go ahead, give me the second one.
Q    Yes, the second one is also, did he hear any ideas from any -- either of the meetings, that was something that he would want to incorporate --
MR. GIBBS:  Well --
Q    And then the third is just who -- what Republicans are coming up to see Rahm tonight?
MR. GIBBS:  I can get a list of that.  I know he has got some guys coming over to talk.  Let me see, I got to keep making sure I can remember all three parts.
Q    About not compromising on the tax cuts.
MR. GIBBS:  That's not what the President said.  The President listened to a number of ideas.  The President has asked Larry and others to evaluate some of those ideas.  I think the member or members that said that were mistaken about, again, they renewed a debate that was being had, that was had here at the White House about the "Make Work Pay" provisions that the President campaigned on that provide a refundability for those that pay the payroll tax.  And the President said, again, that people that pay payroll tax are taxpayers.
Q    It's the same conversation about the same specific tax cut.  It wasn't about the tax cuts in general.
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, yes.  He also talked -- I think this is an illuminating example, because he said to the members, he asked how many members probably in their office had a picture of Ronald Reagan.  You could see hands go up, you could see heads nod.  And he just mentioned the notion that refundability of tax credits for those that don't make a lot of money was a principle that not only he holds but one that Ronald Reagan held with the Earned Income Tax credit in the '80s.
Again, if -- the President said if there are ideas, if there are tax cuts that stimulate the economy, he's happy to listen.  But the notion that somehow -- it would be fairly counterproductive to have gone all the way up there and said, I appreciate all the cameras as I went in, and the smell of the food as I went out, but we're not going to compromise -- that's not the way the President went up there and that's not the mission that was involved.
Q    But he did hear ideas that he thought were good and --
MR. GIBBS:  He heard ideas that he's asked Larry and others to look into, that he -- like I said, he took envelopes from members that brought specific suggestions, some of whom, during the Q&A, audible-ized their suggestions and others who simply wanted to hand them off.
Q    On tax cuts, it's been argued, though, that the "Making Work Pay" tax credit is less stimulative than actually reducing the tax rates for the lowest two brackets.  And also, Grassley has also said that if you were to just pass the minimum -- alternative minimum tax, that would reach more of your lower-end taxpayers.  So are either of those --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the largest -- the largest part of the AMT patch is for middle- and upper middle-class taxpayers.  Obviously it's a proposal that the President has supported in the past and is going to wind its way through Congress.
The President believes that particularly those that have seen their pay and their wages either flat-line or decrease over the past few years, and that have the least buffer in what they make and what their bills are, those are exactly the type of people that we should be giving tax cuts to, because those are the very people that are likely to turn around and spend that money.  He used himself as an example.  You know, you give a tax break to Barack Obama, who's got a pretty -- he's got pretty good digs, right?  He's probably not going to spend his tax cut.  But if you give it to somebody who's making $25,000 or $30,000 a year, with a couple of children, that's a person that doesn't have a lot of buffer between, again, what they make and what their obligations are, and that's money that's likely to be spent.
Ken.
Q    -- you don't argue --
Q    -- in the stimulus?
MR. GIBBS:  Hold on one second.  Go ahead.
Q    You're not arguing the AMT shouldn't be patched, that --
MR. GIBBS:  No, no, no.  I think I said very specifically that this was a -- this is a proposal that in the past the President has supported and voted for.
I'm not going to -- I'm not a member of the Senate Finance Committee, for many obvious and probably good reasons.  I'll let a lot of that wind its way through Congress and we'll go through a process that gets us a bill.
Q    To back up a moment.  You talked a little bit about the Senate, and their -- the meeting with the senators, you talked about the three-legged stool approach.  Is that to say that the House meeting -- the questions were sharper, they were more pointed?
MR. GIBBS:  No.
Q    And could you draw distinctions between how the two --
MR. GIBBS:  No, no, no, no, I meant -- I guess -- which is always the danger of reading out said conversations.  No, no, I don't want to -- again, the House was where members stood up and said -- and thanked him for the tone that he used, members again, that he had worked with in Springfield, and served with in Washington, and now work with as President and Republican members of Congress.
The questions -- the tone was very cordial.  The tone was very polite.  I mean, again I -- maybe it's news that nobody threw anything at anybody.  And like I said, there weren't any -- nobody yelled "food fight."  But there was a discussion about ideas of how we can move this process forward.  And again, the process doesn't end today, it won't end tomorrow, it continues.  And we look forward to ways that we can improve that legislation.
David.
Q    Speaking of readouts, apparently a House member and an aide were emailing reports on the meeting while it was going on to a television network.  What's your reaction to that?
MR. GIBBS:  An excellent way to replace the pool. (Laughter.) Ed, no follow ups to that.  No, no, we're -- no, I'm kidding.  It's -- look, I --
Q    It could be Twitter.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, I know.  I've -- can we excise that from the -- no, I -- look, there wasn't anything said in that meeting that -- again, going back to my non-food fight analogy, I mean, there wasn't anything said in that meeting.  I don't think that you've heard the President say, or that you've heard Republican members of Congress say.  And --
Q    It wasn't open --
MR. GIBBS:  I knew that was coming.  And we will -- in a way of not going through the pool question, we won't open that up for greater debate.  But again, it was cordial.  It was -- maybe it's rare, but I think it was helpful in the process.  I think it's something the President likes to do.  And again, nothing that -- you wouldn't have heard anything that was altogether surprising.  Again, and he said, look, you can -- I understand that some of you aren't going to vote for this and some of you are going to go on television and some of you are going to tell everybody why you didn't vote for it.  That's fine.  But what he wants people to do is have an exchange of those ideas.
As he said during the campaign, we can disagree without finding ourselves being disagreeable.  We can get a piece of legislation that works best for -- not for one political party and not -- the wisdom of each idea shouldn't just be that of one political party, but instead something that works for the American people and, most importantly, something that puts the American people back to work.
David.
Q    On the question of tone, after you had this wonderful love-fest, and the Republicans came out and said how much they're appreciative of the President's listening skills, Eric Cantor came out and released a statement about the bill going through the House.  And he said, this bill will do very little for small businesses, and is unlikely to help working families struggling today.  And he called it a "partisan" bill.
Now, would you and the President say that that was helpful, or not so hopeful, as you move ahead?
MR. GIBBS:  I think the President would say that that is an opinion of one of 535 members of Congress who has decided, for whatever reason, not to support the bill.  I think -- I don't know when the statement went out.  The report that we read before we left was that Congressman Boehner and Congressman Cantor had delivered their remarks about supporting the bill prior to the President coming to Capitol Hill to a meeting they invited him to, to listen what they were doing on the bill.
The President strongly believes, as I've said repeatedly today, that we have a balanced approach that puts money into the pockets of small business -- small businesses and struggling families -- exactly what Congressman Cantor was talking about -- that will help grow the economy, that will put people back to work, and that if we do this in a way that's respectful, that we can get something quickly for the American people and get the economy moving again.
Q    But if this is the type of statements that the Republican leadership is putting out, is there any way at the end of the day to avoid just a partisan battle --
MR. GIBBS:  Sure.
Q    -- to get it passed?
MR. GIBBS:  I think at the end of the day we'll have a bill that a lot of people support and a lot of people are proud of.  We understand that this is a long process.  It doesn't dampen or diminish the President's willingness to seek those opinions and to go out and talk to different people.  I think that's what he'll continue to do.
Q    Robert, this morning Secretary Clinton emphasized the need to use the six-party talks to engage in negotiations with North Korea.  Does the President feel any sense of urgency in restarting those right now?
MR. GIBBS:  I was involved in these meetings and didn't see in particular what she said.  I do believe that the President, regardless of what country or what group we're talking about, believes that urgency in dealing with the very important issues of nuclear proliferation are important and must be done quickly, must be done with the diplomacy of other countries and, when it's necessary, through direct diplomacy of the United States.
Q    How about our week ahead?
MR. GIBBS:  Let's go through the week ahead.  Where did I put the week ahead?
Q    One more, sir?
MR. GIBBS:  Hold on -- I promise tomorrow I'll get you.  How about that?
Q    Thank you.
MR. GIBBS:  All right.  Tomorrow at 10:30 a.m., the President will meet with, in the Roosevelt Room, meet with some CEOs on the economic recovery and reinvestment plan.  At 11:15 a.m., open to the --
Q    Coverage?
MR. GIBBS:  Pool spray in the Roosevelt Room.  At 11:15 a.m., the President will make remarks to the full assembled press corps in the East Room.  At 3:30 p.m., the President will travel to the Pentagon and meet with Secretary Gates and service chiefs; and that will be a pool spray as well.
Thursday at 10:00 a.m., the President looks forward to signing the bill that passed the House today named after Lilly Ledbetter on pay equity; that will be open to the full press corps in the East Room, and Mrs. Obama will attend that event.
At 3:00 p.m. on Thursday, the President will meet with the Treasury Secretary -- I believe that meeting is in the Oval Office -- and we'll have a pool for that.  I do not have anything yet for Friday or Saturday.
So those are the somewhat abbreviated, late --
Q    The remarks in the East Room tomorrow, those are concerning the stimulus?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, sir.  Those will be about the recovery and reinvestment plan.
Q    Followed by questions?
MR. GIBBS:  No.  (Laughter.)  Soon, Major, soon.  So keep writing down your good questions.
I'll get you -- I'll get a list of --
Q    What about Rahm?  You said he's having Republicans here tonight?
MR. GIBBS:  Rahm is hosting some Republicans, and I will try to get those names for you right now.
Q    Robert, Reuters is reporting John Thompson, Chairman and CEO of software company Symantec, top choice for Commerce Secretary.  True?
MR. GIBBS:  To the best of my knowledge, no decisions have been made about a Commerce Secretary.
Q    Is he the top choice?
MR. GIBBS:  I believe his name has been out there as among the candidates that the administration has thought about.  But according to the latest thinking that I had, no decision on that had been made.  We'll get you a list of those CEOs and we'll see you tomorrow.  Thanks.
                             END                    4:43 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 1/28/09

Press Briefing by Press Secretary Robert Gibbs and Secretary of Interior Ken Salazar

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
1:36 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS:  Good afternoon, guys.  Before we get started, I wanted to introduce Secretary Salazar, who is going to make his second trip as our Secretary of the Interior tomorrow -- he's going to go out West.  And I've invited him here to talk a little bit about the reform agenda that he's going to take with him on that trip, and answer a few questions.  And then we'll get back to our regularly scheduled programming.
So, Secretary.    
SECRETARY SALAZAR:  Thank you, Robert. 
President Obama has immediately set high ethical standards for all of government as part of his reform agenda.  As part of that commitment and implementing the reform agenda, I intend to do my part in the Department of Interior to make sure that scandals that have occurred in the past are properly dealt with, and that the problems that we uncover are fixed so that they don't occur again.
President Obama immediately made clear that the type of ethical transgressions, the blatant conflicts of interest, waste and abuses that we have seen over the last eight years will no longer be tolerated.  Nowhere is President Obama's commitment to reform and to cleaning up the waste, fraud and abuse of the past more important than at the Department of Interior, which I now lead on his behalf.
Over the last eight years, the Department of Interior has been tarnished by ethical lapses, of criminal behavior that has extended to the very highest levels of government.  The former deputy secretary of the department under the Bush administration, Steven Griles, was sent to prison.  It is a department that the American people associate with Jack Abramoff.  And it is a department that was tarnished by a scandal involving sex, drugs and inappropriate gifts from the oil and gas companies that the employees were in charge of overseeing. 
The Lakewood, Colorado, office of the Minerals Management Service is taxed with making sure that taxpayers, the American taxpayers, collect their fair share from oil and gas development on their public lands.  Last year that office collected $23 billion.  That's $23 billion on behalf of the American people.  Yet during the last administration, some of the employees of that office violated the public trust by accepting gifts and employment contracts from the very oil and gas companies that they were supposed to be holding accountable.
Some employees engaged in blatant and criminal conflicts of interest and self-dealing.  It is one of the worst examples of corruption, abuse and of government putting special interests before the public interest.
Tomorrow I will be traveling to the Lakewood MMS office to meet with the employees.  I there will be announcing our own review of what happened, what has been done to address it, and what additional steps need to be taken.
It will be clear that we will no longer tolerate those types of lapses at any level of government, from political appointees or career employees.  This is only the first step of our long-term effort to enact comprehensive top-to-bottom reforms within the Department of Interior.  The American people should be proud of their government, all of their government.  Those who work for the government should be proud of their service to the American people.  We will work to reform the Department of the Interior, to restore the public's trust and confidence in the highest levels of ethics and accountability that the American people deserve.
And with that, I'd be happy to take a few questions from the audience.
Q    Secretary, what about -- can you clarify where the administration is right now on whether you're going to overturn the Bush policy on exploring offshore oil and gas drilling, et cetera?
SECRETARY SALAZAR:  With respect to the Outer Continental Shelf, as President Obama made very clear during the campaign, we will look at the OCS in connection with a comprehensive energy program for the nation.  One of the signature issues that President Obama will work on very hard, has worked on very hard, and will continue to work on very hard is the development of a comprehensive energy strategy.  We need to address the economic opportunity here at home, the environmental insecurity that comes from global warming, and also the national security issues.
And so, as we move forward with the development of our oil and gas resources, both onshore and offshore, it has to be a part of a set of a comprehensive energy program.
Q    So do you believe there should be more?
Q    Does that mean it's on hold?  It means there will be no drilling under this order until you've done this review; is that what that means?
SECRETARY SALAZAR:  No, not at all.  The current status of the OCS --
Q    I mean, no expansion -- obviously there is some now --  but expansion -- are you saying that expansion is on hold pending this comprehensive energy policy?
SECRETARY SALAZAR:  The status of the OCS right now is that the five-year plan of the Department of Interior that governs the OCS has been opened up, okay?  And so it is now a plan that is being formulated.  And as that plan gets formulated it is going to have to fit in with a comprehensive energy plan that President Obama wants for the nation, which is a signature issue and one in which the Department of Interior will be intimately involved in supporting the President's goals to get America to a point of energy independence for all the reasons that I articulated earlier.
Q    Mr. Secretary, during the transition, the co-chair of the transition for President Obama, John Podesta, said that the President would be overturning some of the executive orders and presidential orders President Bush had put into place about oil and gas exploration on federal lands.  We have not seen any executive orders or presidential orders overturning them, and I'm wondering if they're pending, and if you think it's wise to limit where the United States is able to explore for energy during this time of energy crisis, where we're getting all our oil from abroad.
SECRETARY SALAZAR:  The answer to that question is that there are a number of different regulations and actions that were taken by the Bush administration, some of them in the midnight hour as their term expired here, and we have all of those on the table and we're taking a look at them.  There are some which are bad and which need a new direction.  There are probably some which will be kept in place.  And so we are now in the process, having now been in the Department of Interior's position, really, for only about a week, at taking a look at all of these regulations.
On the more fundamental issue which I think you are addressing, which is the approach to oil and gas development -- it has to be done in the context of a comprehensive energy plan.  And it also has to be done with the right kind of balance.  There are places where it is appropriate to explore and to develop oil and gas resources, and there are places that are not appropriate.  And so that's part of what we'll move forward with in the agenda at the Department of Interior.
Q    Of the incidents that you cited in your opening statement, were most of those political appointees?  Were some career?  And in the week in which you've been in office, have any ongoing ethics violations been brought to your attention?
SECRETARY SALAZAR:  The report the Inspector General referred to -- there are actually three investigations that were conducted by the Inspector General -- some of them had to do with very high-level employees within the Department of Interior and engaging in self-dealing and other kinds of inappropriate relations with outside interests.  Some of the -- two of the investigations dealt with gifts and sex and drugs actually taking place in transactions in the very government buildings where MMS has its responsibilities.  So we're taking a look at that, and tomorrow we'll have some additional announcements on where we want to take all those issues.
Q    But are they political appointees, or are they career people who are still working for you?
SECRETARY SALAZAR:  They're both.  They're both.
Thank you.
MR. GIBBS:  Thank you.
SECRETARY SALAZAR:  Now you get the hot seat.
MR. GIBBS:  Exactly.  (Laughter.)
SECRETARY SALAZAR:  Can I sit up here and watch you -- (sits in Helen Thomas's seat.)  (Laughter.)   
MR. GIBBS:  He wants to sit -- there you go.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Don't block my view.  (Laughter.) 
MR. GIBBS:  Under one condition, that I don't get any hard questions from you in the middle of that -- in the middle of that chair.  I might have --
Q    -- questions to ask him.
MR. GIBBS:  I might have spoken far too soon.
Q    Ask him something we don't know about -- (laughter.) 
MR. GIBBS:  Yes.  And definitely no talking to those guys on either side of you who -- I'm going to get asked about some acreage leasing on --
Q    The first time we have a Secretary in the first row.
MR. GIBBS:  He's -- well, I want to say this was helpfully provided to my by CBS News so that I would -- (laughter) -- this is day nine of the Obama presidency -- a service of CBS News.  So I thought I would -- got a kick out of that.  I thought that was pretty good.
Let me make a few announcements before we entertain everyone but Secretary Salazar's questions.  The President has made a call to President Motlanthe of South Africa.  And we'll have a readout on that at the conclusion of this.  The President met -- had his economic daily briefing this morning in the Oval Office.  In addition to Secretary Geithner and Dr. Summers, he was joined by Paul Volcker, who, as you know, is in charge of the President's Economic Recovery Advisory Board.  And the main topic of discussion was financial reregulation, a topic that the President spoke about yesterday on Capitol Hill, and you'll hear certainly more of as we move forward. 
Lastly, as you all know, the President intends to make his first foreign trip as President to Canada.  He will make that trip on February the 19th.  Canada is a vitally important ally, and the President looks forward to the opportunity to speak with Prime Minister Harper and visit our neighbor to the north.  So please add that to your appropriate planning schedules.
And lastly, the President looks forward to the House's action this evening on a recovery and reinvestment plan that he believes tonight is likely to take an important first step in getting our economy back on track and saving -- plan to save or create 3 or 4 million jobs, as I said, begin to get our economy moving again.  The President looks forward to that vote, and we'll have some comments on that later.  I think, again, tonight starts the beginning of what we know is going to be a long process as it relates to that, but I think tonight will be a very important first step.
With that -- Jennifer.
Q    Thanks.  I want to talk about the meeting he's having at the Pentagon this afternoon.  You talked, and Secretary Gates has talked about a process that's underway.  There was the meeting last week, there's the meeting today, there's going to be one specifically on Afghanistan next week, there will be others.  But can you talk a little bit more about how long you guys expect this process to take, how it works?  I mean, you said yesterday that he has to go through all this in order to make decisions on the troop posture.  And there are several different options, different formulations being put together at the Pentagon, being presented to him of how he can do what it is he wants to do.  So can you just explain more about how this is going to work?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes.  Well, I think the most important thing -- and the President spoke about this, as many of you heard, throughout the campaign, and both during the transition and now as President of the United States -- that -- and as I said yesterday, the Secretary of Defense was very clear on this -- that he wanted to put everybody that was involved in these decisions in front of the President so the President could hear all of their advice.
The President committed, as a part of this process, to speak with commanders both on the ground in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as region-wide commanders, to get their perspective as he laid out a new mission for Iraq.  I think everybody understands that the developments over the past few months in Iraq, with the status of forces agreement that puts an end date on our involvement there -- we're no longer involved in a debate about whether, but how and when.  That's a process the President wants to take seriously; wants to ensure the safety of our troops as we remove our combat brigades; wants to, as I've said repeatedly, provide the responsibility and the opportunity for the Iraqis to do more in governing their own country; and as I said, to do this in a way that seeks the consultation of all those leaders.
The process began on the 21st, as you guys know, in the Situation Room, continues today at the Pentagon.  I think there will be at least one more meeting that will involve General McKiernan to discuss specifically Afghanistan. 
I don't anticipate the process will take an inordinate amount of time.  I think one of the things the President expects to hear today, and one of the -- what we all heard yesterday in the testimony from Secretary Gates is how important improving our position in Afghanistan is, and secondly, how we are at a point now where many of our forces are stretched very, very thin, and the burden that we put on not just the soldiers every day, but on the many family members that stay here and pray for their loved ones and care for their children. 
So I think we've got a deliberate process that the President will be able to receive that information and make some key determinations as we change that mission in Iraq.
Q    So can you be more specific about when we might hear from him?
MR. GIBBS:  I think it will be relatively soon.  I don't want to set an exact date, though I think it will be relatively shortly.  I think the President and -- the President has received a lot of information; the Pentagon has been planning for quite some time -- partly because of the new agreements.  They understand -- everyone understands that our force structure there will change, but that we have to do so in a way that protects the troops that we have there now.
Q    Robert, can you talk about the policy toward Afghanistan?  Specifically, the New York Times article today said that there was going to be a shift in the policy, more emphasis on fighting insurgents, less emphasis on development.  Can you talk about that?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, let me -- I guess before I get into some of the back-and-forth, let me try to clarify some of I think what we believed was erroneous reporting overnight.
As I just said, there is a review of our policy in Afghanistan.  That policy review continues in order to ensure our success in that region, but that that policy review is not yet completed.  Secondly, we support the democratically elected President of Afghanistan.  And lastly, the President has emphasized in the campaign and in the transition and emphasizes now the importance of long-term development both in Afghanistan and in the region. 
I mean, I think one of the interesting things when we were involved in the meeting on Iraq was you didn't just have, sitting around that table or on the video conference, you didn't just have members of the military or the military planning.  You had Ambassador Crocker, who was providing a very important political update on upcoming elections and the political environment in Iraq, as well as at that meeting the State Department was represented by former Ambassador Burns. 
The President has long believed that whether it's in Iraq or in Afghanistan, that there -- though it's the central front on the war on terror in Afghanistan, or whether it relates to Afghanistan or Iraq, that there's not simply a military solution to that problem; that only through long-term and sustainable development can we ever hope to turn around what's going on there.
So I would caution you -- I know the importance of getting stories out into newspapers; they may not altogether be finished by the time they get printed.
Q    But he's talked about the Europeans may be focusing more on the development, so the development wouldn't be forgotten about, but the Americans would focus on fighting insurgency.  Is that part of it realistic --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that the -- and I think the President certainly has talked about this; you all heard him talk about it particularly on his trip overseas during the campaign and in his speech in Berlin, and in his discussions recently with leaders in Europe, he's talked to them not only about increased troop commitments, but also on that development piece that's so crucial.
But again, before we read too much into what was in that report, I think it's important to understand that the review -- the comprehensive review that this administration has undertaken about our policy in Afghanistan is not yet complete.  So I caution you to say that a lot of decisions have thus been made based on an incomplete report.
Q    Okay.  Also, his relationship with Karzai -- he met with Karzai last July -- the article suggests that he's no longer going to be doing the video conferences that President Bush did.
MR. GIBBS:  That's -- well, again, that's part of the policy review, and when that's completed, we'll have a better sense of what that is.  Again, we support the democratically elected President of Afghanistan, and look forward to working with him and with others to ensure peace and stability and safety in the region.
Q    Robert, building on the eloquent comments of Secretary Salazar about ethics and accountability in government, is the President bothered at all that Secretary Geithner has picked as his chief of staff a former lobbyist for Goldman Sachs who has obviously -- that company has benefitted from government bailouts.  Doesn't that punch a hole in what the President signed just last week in terms of preventing lobbyists like that from serving in his administration?
MR. GIBBS:  No, the President -- well, let's -- again, let's step back and talk about the broader issue of ethics and transparency in this administration.  As I've said from this podium, and as you all read in papers throughout the country, that the ethics and transparency executive orders that the President signed the first day institute a policy that covers this administration unlike any policy we've seen in any previous administration in the history of our country.  The President spoke about this during the campaign, but he also spoke about the notion that no policy was going to be perfect.  The President, in his election campaign, didn't take money from lobbyists or from PACs -- again, not a perfect policy, but a step in the right direction of changing the way Washington works.
We've talked about the fact that there are people that are good public servants who wish to serve their government again, who are -- through some stringent ethics requirements and recusals, they will be able to participate in helping this government.  But we have, again, the strongest ethics and transparency policy that govern the executive branch and the workings of this White House that we've seen in the history of our country.
Q    But if it's a strong -- even if it's a strong policy, does it mean anything if people are getting waivers to go around it?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, you know, let's caution ourselves as to the number of people that are going to work both in this building and in the executive branch and how many waivers we have.  Again, I think if the people that follow this issue most closely, whether it's political analysts or think tanks throughout this city who have seen the way this city works, have seen the revolving door and watched how administrations conduct their business, have rendered the conclusion that the policy that we have is the strongest that any administration in the history of our country has had, I think that speaks for itself.
Those very same people that labeled that policy the strongest of any administration in history also said they thought it made sense for a limited number of waivers to ensure that people could continue to serve the public.
Q    Senator Mitchell, in fact, right now is in the Mideast, and Bloomberg has reported that the firm that he chaired -- they have all kinds of lobbying clients in the Mideast, for example.  So how can he go to the Mideast when his -- the firm --
MR. GIBBS:  Let's not take a lot of things and misconstrue, right?  You know, let's not take --
Q    Which part is misconstrued?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, has Senator Mitchell lobbied?
Q    He is not registered lobbyist, but he is chair --
MR. GIBBS:  Okay.  So let's not --
Q    -- business, so isn't that another way to get around it?
MR. GIBBS:  I assume that maybe media organizations are owned by different businesses that conduct different things that might not altogether represent the interests of the media interest in general.  But let's not take a group and an example and try to squish it into something that it's not.
Q    He's been the head of a firm that has all kinds of lobbyists with business in the Mideast and all around the world --
MR. GIBBS:  But you asked me about --
Q    -- website says they have all these contacts in the Mideast.  And so, even if he's technically not lobbying, this firm is making money off of his --
MR. GIBBS:  I hate to be ticky-tack about it, but technically he's not lobbying. 
Q    He's not a registered lobbyist, but you know how --
MR. GIBBS:  But, Ed, to lobby the federal government you have to be registered.  I mean, I hate to -- I understand the semantic hurdles that you're setting forward for the policy, but let's understand, he wasn't a lobbyist, he wasn't registered to lobby, and if you're not registered to lobby you can't be a lobbyist.  That's why people have rendered the policy to be the strongest that it's been for any administration. 
Q    But, Robert, the broader point is what's the point of having the strongest policy if you're going to have waivers, especially at key posts that are some of the most high-profile and most important --
MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- we will distribute to you the quotes from the people that rendered the decision that we have the strongest lobbying and transparency proposals, but also spoke out for a limited number of waivers to ensure that highly qualified people can serve in the public interest.
But again, we have a policy that governs this White House and this administration unlike anything that has been covered from this room or has been seen in this city.  That's the bottom line, and that's irrefutable.
Jake.
Q    Robert, on the stimulus package, the President yesterday told a closed-door meeting of House Republicans that there was spending in the bill that he didn't like.  And obviously he took action, calling Congressman Waxman to remove the part having to do with birth control.  Now, there is a $335 million provision for education for sexually transmitted diseases.  There still is in the bill $50 million funding for the National Endowment for the Arts.  And that's the House.  And I understand your emphasis in the Senate, but in the Senate there are earmarked projects, as well:  $70 million for a supercomputer for NOAA, $75 million for education for smoking cessation.  President Obama can tell these Democratic senators and members of the House, take the stuff out of the bill.  He obviously did so with Congressman Waxman.  Why doesn't he do it for all these earmarks?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me talk a little bit about what he said yesterday at these meetings, because he said that there's no doubt this will produce a process whereby every person does not like 100 percent of every part of the bill, but that would be true whether Democrats were writing the bill, or Republicans were writing the bill.  And he said that to two rooms full of Republicans, of which I think there was pretty broad agreement.
This is a process based on a series of principles and framework that our economic team and the President sent to Capitol Hill to create a plan that we believe will move this economy along.  I know there is a tendency, and there always will be, to focus on, as I mentioned yesterday, 2/100ths of 1 percent of a piece of legislation.  I have a hard time believing that the 98/100ths of the other 99 percent aren't the large focus of members of Congress that are going to vote both today and over the course of the next few weeks.
Q    President Obama had that problem, calling Chairman Waxman and telling him to remove 2/100ths of 1 percent from the bill when he saw that it was a hurdle.
MR. GIBBS:  But again, let's focus on the larger picture.  Let's focus on the fact that we have $275 billion in tax cuts to put money directly into the pockets of hardworking Americans that will spend that money and get our economy moving again.  Let's focus on the fact that there is $550 billion in spending that will put people back to work.
But as we get focused on this number and that number and 2/100ths of 1 percent and all this kind of stuff, understand what we've seen in just the last 48 hours, Jake:  70,000 people since Monday have gotten pink slips from the companies that they work for, right?  The unemployment figures that came out just yesterday from the Bureau of Labor Statistics found every state in the country's -- every state in the country saw job loss.  Every state in the country.  The layoffs continue today, with Boeing announcing an additional 10,000 jobs that will be shed over the course of the year.
Q    That's precisely my point.  Wouldn't it be better to take that $75 million, instead of sending it to a smoking cessation program, to send it to these people that are out of work?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the vast majority, the great bulk of that bill, does exactly that.  We hope that Republicans and Democrats alike look at not just whatever page you're focusing on but whatever other pages they've decided not to focus on, and understand that the program that is being crafted -- and it will change -- there's a great tendency, and we've done this over the last few days in this room, to try to figure out what the score of the baseball game is after the third inning, okay?  My team would probably be great if we stopped doing that.  This is a long process that we hope is concluded by President's Day recess, because -- and the President heard this from CEOs today -- we can't afford to wait.  We have to act. 
Tonight the House, we believe, will take an important step.  We think if members focus on this bill they'll see that it moves the economy forward; that money will be spent in this economy, 75 percent of it in the first 18 months; that jobs will be created, jobs will be saved, money will get put back into people's pockets.  This, along with a financial stability package, reregulation, and a plan to deal with home foreclosures, will push this economy forward and put people back to work.  And hopefully one day we can come up here and I won't have to answer a question based on the fact that another company has decided to lay off 2,000 or 10,000 or 20,000 people.
Q    The President was incredibly well received yesterday by Republicans.  They called him everything from sincere, to nice, to brilliant.  One said he talks more like a Republican than a Democrat.  I mean, they obviously like him and they think he's very serious about this.  Yet it appears he has had no effect on the vote -- perhaps a handful or a couple of votes.  Is it frustrating or disappointing to him to go up there, to be so well received and have no effect on the vote?
MR. GIBBS:  No, again, this is a many-vote, many-day process.  There will be a vote tonight, there will be a vote next week, there will be votes the weeks after that, until we eventually have what we think will be a bipartisan proposal to get this economy moving again.  Again, I hesitate to call the game after the third inning.  I hate to declare the winner.  I hate to declare that -- I know we'll have analysis to write, but let's not stop after the third inning and tell us who won in the ninth.  It's a long process --
Q    But don't --
MR. GIBBS:  Hold on -- look, I don't -- the President, as I said from this podium yesterday, believes that the three or so hours he spent on Capitol Hill were well spent yesterday.  We're having bipartisan leaders come down to the White House tonight.  Congress Wamp of Tennessee said that what he saw from the President yesterday was not a PR stunt, that it was sincere, as the quotes that you read suggest.  The President is very serious about this.  Whether it all happens overnight in terms of votes, we'll wait and see.  But my sense is that over the long run, listening to both parties, changing the way this town works and listens to each other is important not just as we focus on this piece of legislation, but as we focus on the many ideas and the many pieces of legislation that are going to have to be undertaken in order to move the economy forward.
Q    Can I, Robert, follow up -- and I'd like to give it to Secretary Salazar, if I could -- no.  I want to ask about --
MR. GIBBS:  He's going to ask me a softball --
Q    -- the cocktail party tonight.  What was the genesis of that idea?  And it's evenly divided, six and six, I believe, from the House, and five and five, party-wise from the Senate --
MR. GIBBS:  That's so the basketball games are easier.  (Laughter.)
Q    Is that going to be the way it is around here?  Is he going to have just as many Republicans visiting him here as Democrats?  And is he going to see the Republicans just as often on the Hill as the Democrats?  Is it going to be that bipartisan?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the second part -- as I said yesterday, I don't -- the offer was made; he accepted that offer to come to Capitol Hill yesterday.  Congressman Pence invited him back and said the door was always open.  And I said I thought the President would likely take him up on that opportunity.  He's serious about that. 
I don't know the particular ratios of tonight.  I think it's -- we have an equal number of leaders on both sides of the aisle and in both the House and the Senate that the President looks forward to getting to know better, to being able to establish a strong working relationship with, to move the priorities of the American people forward.
At the end of the day, the President understands that both he and Congress will be judged by what we can all do for the American people.  And I think that is a step in this process toward being able to work together and provide some hope and hopefully some better times for the American people.
Q    Robert, the head of the CBO went up to the Senate Budget Committee today and said that the TARP, the financial bailout, hundreds of billions of dollars short.  Do you guys concur with that assessment from the CBO?
MR. GIBBS:  I have -- I did not see that report before I came out here.  I know that, as I've said, the economic team continues to work on a series of proposals for the President to look at.  Again, during the economic daily briefing the President had today, he had Mr. Volcker in to talk about financial reregulation.  What we talked about yesterday on Capitol Hill was not one thing or one aspect that will solve our economic crisis, but instead, how an economic recovery and reinvestment plan, a financial stability package, and a reregulation package all together can help move the economy forward.
The one thing I did see -- now that you've mentioned our good friends at the CBO -- the CBO says that without stimulus, "the shortfall in the nation's output relative to its potential would be the largest -- in terms of both length and depth -- since the Great Depression."  I think those are clear words from the Congressional Budget Office in understanding if anyone needed any more numbers to understand how very important it is that the House take these important steps tonight and that the Senate soon follow, and ultimately we get to the President's desk a recovery and reinvestment plan.
Q    It's my understand that the conversation with Senate Republicans with the President had to do a lot with the bigger picture --
MR. GIBBS:  It did.
Q    -- of the economic environment.  Did he get suggestions of how -- because if this CBO report is true, and it sounds like you believe -- you like to quote from the CBO, so you must believe that they -- 
MR. GIBBS:  There are occasions in which I have read the CBO.
Q    -- this is accurate reporting -- did they give you suggestions of how you can sell the American people on this idea that you're going to have to get billions of more dollars in taxpayer money?
MR. GIBBS:  I think the main message -- and I struggle every day just to be the spokesperson for one individual in this town, so I very much hesitate to speak for an entire group --
Q    But you were in the room.
MR. GIBBS:  I was in the room, so let me give you my impression, which was, the main message that I heard -- and I heard it again on cable this morning from members -- Republican members of the Senate -- was that -- and this is a concept the President agrees quite strongly with -- and that is that one aspect of this alone isn't going to solve our problems and isn't going to fully or adequately address the economic crisis; that only by addressing each of the legs of this stool will we create something that can stand on its own. 
I don't think they got -- I don't recall, at least, getting into specific numbers.  You know, they -- I think both the President and Senate Republicans understand the urgency of the next set of funds being used differently, more transparently, with a far greater eye to actual lending of money.  We've all been reminded in the last couple days how entities can get money from the American taxpayers and seek to use it poorly.  And thankfully, that, I think because of the outrage of Capitol Hill and some phone calls, got stopped.  But the focus was more on the notion that many things had to happen in order for our economy to get moving again.  I think Senate Republicans and I think the President are heartened that there is agreement that tackling one won't solve it; we are going to have to work together and on parallel tracks to address many of these problems over the course of --
Q    Is it fair to characterize it that he wasn't just lobbying for a stimulus, he was lobbying for all three legs of the stool --
MR. GIBBS:  I think he was agreeing with the discussion that each of these aspects is extremely important if we are to see the economy recover and Americans get put back to work. 
Q    Robert, all of these pages that you see as being selectively picked apart when questions are raised about they add up to a lot of money in tight times -- to what extent do you see any further paring of those kinds of programs before this thing comes out of conference and goes to a final vote?
MR. GIBBS:  I think this largely proves my somewhat maybe possibly weak baseball analogy that, again, this is a -- if the vote is happening in the third inning, we've still got six more innings to go.  So you can look at each one of these things each and every day; I think it's more important to see where we end up.
Q    They keep score each inning.
MR. GIBBS:  They do.  They do.  But they don't declare winners -- you get up and stretch at one point during the game and there's a man that says you can't buy beer after a certain time.  But the umpire doesn't declare the game over except for one point in the game.  (Laughter.)  So I guess I would stress that even if you get up to stretch and buy beer, they only call one winner.  So let's hope that that one winner is the American people because both teams have worked together. 
Q    Oooh!
Q    Wow!
MR. GIBBS:  I'll take two.  I'll -- (laughter.)  Yes, sir.
Q    To follow up on that, the President today and previously has talked about skepticism.  Aren't these the very kinds of programs that engender skepticism?  Smoking cessation programs and these kinds of things?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, here's my point, is let's write a story on the money that's going to go to rebuild schools that the President visited, like the ones in South Carolina that haven't been refurbished or redone since I think it was 1899.  Right?  I think there's a lot more money that goes to something like that, that will put people back to work in South Carolina, which has seen its unemployment rate grow to 9.5 percent, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics just yesterday.  Or let's focus on building roads and bridges in a place like Michigan, that's watched its unemployment rate increased to 10.6 percent as of yesterday, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.  Or any other investments in jobs, or health care, or energy in a place like California that watched 80,000 jobs be shed just last month, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
I think we can get focused on a lot of different things.  I think it is important to understand and to look at the long view of this, to understand that there are committee processes, there's votes, there's the Rules Committee, there's the floor, there's amendments, there's final passage -- there's all these fancy legislative terms.  But let's look at the final product that we get, and understand that the President hopes, sincerely hopes, that each person looks at the totality of the package and what it will do to get the economy moving again.
Q    Robert, a logistical question -- can we expect to hear from him after the House vote?
MR. GIBBS:  We will have something for you after that vote.  I'm not entirely sure what form it will take.
Q    Robert, I'd like to go back to the oil drilling, OCS.  Is it the goal, or once this review is completed, will there be more oil drilling?  Or will there be little change?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me get some legislative advice on this as it relates to where we are in the policy.  I know that Congress did not renew the ban on offshore oil drilling.  The President, as the Secretary said, supports some new drilling as it relates to a larger and more comprehensive energy independence plan.  I think you heard the President say throughout the campaign, much like the financial crisis that we face, that it's not one thing that's likely to -- that we're likely to do on any given day and wake up and be far less dependent on foreign oil.  It's not going to just be drilling offshore, just like it's not just going to be wind or solar energy, or just going to be biofuels.  It's going to be all of those things taken together.  I think that's what the President hopes to do.  I think a down payment on that larger investment to getting ourselves to energy independence is contained within the recovery and reinvestment plan that he thinks and hopes will move forward.
Q    I understand that.  But he shifted his position when the gas was about 4 bucks a gallon. 
MR. GIBBS:  I think both candidates shifted their position.  Amazing how politicians can do that as it relates to the whims of their constituents.
Q    But what I'm getting at is will there likely be more drilling once this review --
MR. GIBBS:  I think that, as I said yesterday, the President supports increased exploration, domestically, for more energy, just as the President also believes that that will only make a difference if we take a whole series of steps to both reduce the demand, as well as increase an energy supply to make ourselves truly energy independent.
Q    Robert, I want to start with Afghanistan.  And if you'd be kind enough, I want to ask a follow-up on the economic stimulus.  Yesterday, Secretary Gates said the following:  "We need to be very careful about the nature of our goals we set for ourselves in Afghanistan."  He also said, "The civilian casualties are doing U.S. and NATO forces enormous harm."  As the review goes forward, can you tell the American people what are the specific goals for this new policy in Afghanistan, and how will the implementation of that policy confront this issue of civilian casualties?
And also on Afghanistan, Secretary Gates said he believes NATO nations are now more prepared than they were under President Bush to offer more forces in Afghanistan.  Since you've given us written readouts on the President's calls with NATO leaders on Afghanistan, is Secretary Gates right in making this assertion?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I'm certainly not going to question Secretary Gates' assertion.  I think those are backed up by discussions that both the President has had as well as the Secretary has had.  I think honestly the best answer to what our goals are in Afghanistan, as well as the path that we have to take to ensure that we meet those goals, is best contained in what Secretary Gates said yesterday, that it's going to take quite some time and that we have to be realistic about both that timeline and those goals. 
The President said that -- and as I restated earlier -- that Afghanistan and the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan represent the central front on the war on terror; that today in those places, terrorists likely plot their next steps both against governments in that region, as well as against us.  And the safety and the security of the American people are utmost on the President's agenda.  Through that comprehensive review, we'll adjust whatever we need to, to meet goals and time lines as it relates to Afghanistan.
Go ahead.
Q    That's it on Afghanistan?  Okay.  On the economic stimulus, Alice Rivlin -- Democrat, supporter of this President -- has looked at spending to create jobs both from a congressional perspective and from the Office of Management and Budget -- said yesterday that she's concerned that, structurally, the stimulus plan doesn't focus all of its attention on immediate job creation; that there's programmatic things -- some of them have been raised here in the briefing today -- that while it may be preferable and maybe should be done, shouldn't be in a stimulus plan; that the stimulus plan should focus 100 percent of its spending and legislative intensity on immediate job creation.  Is the structural debate over what's going to be in this bill over as far as the White House is concerned, and it's a just a matter of the overall dollars?  How do you evaluate that, I would probably say, from her point of view, helpful criticism of the way this bill is currently structured?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, I think there are probably opinions on either side of this debate.  The President believes that the rough outlines of the plan as they are now, both in tax cuts and in direct spending, present the best way forward in helping the health of our economy.  Obviously, as I said yesterday and as the -- the President will meet with Republicans today, or see Republicans today -- he's listening to ideas.  I think the structure of what that might ultimately -- that ultimate structure is certainly something that will be -- that will move around and be debated not just this afternoon and tonight on the floor of the House, but later on in the Senate and in committees.  And the President is ready, willing, and able to listen to good ideas, as I said yesterday.  The President believes ultimately we have to get a good plan quickly to the American people. 
There are, I think, some disagreements, and I would disagree with some of the characterizations of -- I've seen -- again, I've seen people say that hiring cops isn't a stimulus program.  As I said yesterday, if you're about to fire cops, hiring cops is a stimulus program; it creates jobs.
I think increasing Pell grants and letting kids go to college without having to borrow tens of thousands of dollars helps our economy grow.  The President is committed to ensuring that 75 percent of the money in this plan is spent out in 18 months to create jobs, but also to lay the groundwork for long-term investments and long-term economic growth.  We are not going to be out of the woods after only a certain period of time.  There are obviously going to be time periods after that where we're going to have to continue to do -- we're going to have to continue to make investments in order to continue that economic growth and that job growth.
This isn't a one-time deal.  We are going to have to work actively, not just this year, not just next year, but likely the year after that.  The stimulus program isn't going to, in and of itself, solve every problem.  We've got a lot of work to do, and it's going to take a long time to get that done.
Q    Robert.
MR. GIBBS:  Yes.
Q    To follow up on Major, by your own definition, only 75 percent of this is short-term stimulus, or 65 percent, according to CBO.  What was the reason for not taking that extra whatever it is, 25 or 35 percent -- which is a lot of money -- $900 billion -- since it's not short-term stimulus, however worthy an investment it might be, and actually paying for it, instead of just adding it to the deficit, since by your definition it's not short-term stimulus?
MR. GIBBS:  Let's understand -- let's take the larger question for a second, because the President has said -- and they talked about this yesterday, particularly in the House, and I forget whether this came up a lot in the Senate -- but if we don't take steps right now to grow our economy, a $1.2 trillion deficit that this President inherited from his predecessor is not going to get any better.  We're not going to grow the economy, we're not going to see a lessening of those deficits if unemployment hits 10 percent, or if nobody can borrow money because banks can't lend it and people don't have jobs to do it.
So the first thing we have to do -- we have to take actions necessary in the short-term to ensure economic growth that will ultimately reduce that deficit once the economy begins to grow again. 
The reason that some of this money isn't completely spent out in '09 and 2010 is precisely what I just talked to Major about.  I don't think we're going to wake up on January 1, 2011, you know, like Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz, and we're going to go from black and white to color.  We're still going to have a lot of battles to face and economic hardship to move the economy to a better place. 
So that the investment and the stimulus that happen as a result of this legislation don't drop off like a cliff, some of that money bleeds into 2011.  The CBO I think talked in its report about the fact that that money would then -- would create jobs in 2011.  I don't want to get hung up on sort of these rigid times and not understand that we're going to wake up the beginning of 2011 and want people to be employed, families to be borrowing money to buy the things that they want to, like cars or loans for their kids to go to school, and to have healthy small businesses that are creating jobs.  All that stuff has got to happen; it's not just going to all happen overnight.
Q    One other thing.  I don't want to nitpick, but yesterday you were very eloquent in your defense of re-sodding the Mall, which is no longer in the plan.
MR. GIBBS:  I almost made it out of here without -- (laughter.)
Q    So have you changed your mind on that now that it seems like Congress has decided that that wasn't as stimulative as you very convincingly presented yesterday?  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  I should make you a committee chair.  I think it demonstrates the perils of playing umpire in the third inning.  (Laughter.)
Goyal, I said I would call on you, so I will call on you now.
Q    Thank you, Mr. Gibbs.  Two questions, please, quick ones.  Before my question I first want to really bring my best wishes and congratulations to President Obama and the First Lady from the Indian American community and 1 billion-plus people in India.
MR. GIBBS:  I will pass that along.
Q    And my question is that, many people around the globe are expecting too much from the President because of the change is coming --
MR. GIBBS:  You mean people in this room?  (Laughter.)
Q    No, people around the -- in the region of South Asia, let's say, and India.  What change are we expecting as far as U.S.-India relations are concerned, and especially the terrorism in the region that President has been talking about, and including you?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, without getting into a lot of specifics, Goyal, I think that the President believes that obviously the U.S. and India are natural friends and natural allies.  The President looks forward over the course of this term to deepen the partnership that's been built between the two countries over these past many years, to strengthen those ties.  He will have more to say about that in the future. 
And I think the President -- the President would like to certainly express and extend his best wishes to the Prime Minister as he recovers from surgery, and looks forward to talking to him soon.  And I can come give you guys a readout on that.
Q    And second, as far as -- I met a lady at the 15th and K Street on a wheelchair, very old lady and disabled, of course, and I asked her that -- she said, you go to the White House.  I said, yes.  "Can I -- can you pass on my message to the President Obama."  I said, what do you want from him?  And she said, tell him, please, increase in the disability payments.
MR. GIBBS:  Increase the disability payments?
Q    Yes.
MR. GIBBS:  I will pass that along to both the President and his advisors.
Q    And on the trip to Canada -- what will the President's message to Canada be regarding the economic crisis given that Canada is the U.S.'s largest trading partner?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think -- without getting into what a bilateral agenda might be for that trip, I think it is safe to say that the health of each economy and the health of the global economy will be a large part of that agenda.  And I strongly anticipate, as was the case when the President met -- then President-elect met with the leader of Mexico, that trade will be a part of that docket.
Q    When might he meet with McKiernan?
MR. GIBBS:  I will try to see if that -- I don't know that it's been slated in the schedule yet, but I know that it has --
Q    Days?  Weeks?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me try to see if I can get a little bit better guidance on that.
                                     END             2:29 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 1/29/09

Press Briefing by Press Secretary Robert Gibbs

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
2:12 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS:  All right, sorry I'm both late and early, all at the same time.  (Laughter.)  And I --
Q    Even the Clinton White House has never done that -- to be late and early.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Let me apologize in advance.  My five-and-a-half-year-old has a cold; therefore, I have a cold.  So if I sniff a little bit, it's because of that.
Just a couple of quick things, and we'll get into your questions.  In addition to the calls that he made yesterday to foreign leaders, he also called last night Prime Minister Aso of Japan.  Also, in addition to later last night, the President signed disaster declarations for both Arkansas and Kentucky and spoke with both of the governors of those two states to notify them of those signatures.
You all, I hope, were at the Lilly Ledbetter signing this morning, so you know a little bit about that. 
And then -- and we'll try to conclude this at an appropriate time -- at 3:00 p.m., the President will take a group of you into a meeting with the President and Treasury Secretary Geithner.  I know the President is anxious to make a few remarks there about some -- about stuff that's been in the news the last couple of days, and particularly stuff that was on the front page of our newspapers this morning relating to CEO bonuses, which he will get into at that -- at those remarks.
And with that, let me take a few questions.  Jennifer.
Q    News-of-the-day question -- the military judge's ruling in the USS Cole suspect case at Guantanamo.  We'd like a comment on that, first of all, but also kind of the bigger picture.  I mean, you guys have asked for a delay in all the trials there.  Does this throw a kink into that?  How does it affect the broader effort to step back and take a look at those detainees?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me --
Q    Repeat the question, because we can't hear with the --
MR. GIBBS:  Oh, I'm sorry, with the new Zamboni?  (Laughter.) 
Q    Repeat the question.
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, the question related to -- come on in, guys.  (Laughter.)  All right.  All right.  No more -- the place is now sold out, so no more tickets.
This was -- Jennifer asked a question about the ruling that just came down, which did not grant a stay for the military commission in one case.  We just learned of the ruling here, as you did, and we are consulting with the Pentagon and the Department of Justice to explore our options in that case.  I believe that all the other trials were stayed, which I think continues to give us what we need to evaluate who is at Gitmo and make the decisions commensurate with the executive order that the President signed.
But we are -- we're working to get some consultation on that, and when we have some we'll certainly let you know about that.
Q    Just to be clear, what you're saying is that this -- the action in this one case you don't believe throws a kink into the ability to evaluate the entire situation --
MR. GIBBS:  No, not at all.
Q    -- and the status of detainees there?
MR. GIBBS:  Not at all.
Yes, sir.
Q    You mentioned that the President was going to be talking about executive bonuses.  There is a report that came out of the New York Comptroller's Office a short time ago saying that the corporate CEOs, many of them of companies that have received taxpayer dollars, were paid massive bonuses, totaling more than $18 billion.  Is he going to be addressing that in some way?  Can you elaborate?
MR. GIBBS:  He will address that, and I will elaborate and I will give you the one-word answer that he gave us this morning:  outrageous.  I think he will expound on the outrageousness of what he read. 
The President spoke during his inaugural of an ethic of responsibility that we needed to see reinstituted in certain aspects of our country, particularly in our financial institutions.
Whether it's government or the financial system, we're not going to be able to do what is needed to be done to stabilize our financial system if the American people read about this type of outrageous behavior.  We started the beginning of the week with a bank that's in some trouble interested in purchasing a $50 million jet.  I think the outrage on the Hill and some phone calls and some outrage here probably stopped that. 
But obviously, we're asking a lot of the American people to take extraordinary steps to stabilize our financial system.  The President is committed to doing what is necessary to do that, but shares the frustration of the American people when they read about I think it was the sixth largest year of bonuses.  And I don't think anybody that's opened their 401(k) statement has found out that this was the sixth best year for Wall Street.  He'll address that in some more rage --
Q    Will there be specific measures that will be brought forth by the administration --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, one of the things that the President is doing today is he met -- had his economic daily briefing that included Dr. Summers, Christina Romer, Secretary Geithner.  They are working on -- that is a portion of what they're working on as it relates to going forward on the financial stability money that Congress has appropriated.
Q    What can he do?
MR. GIBBS:  That's what we're looking into, and that's what we're working on recommendations for.  You know, I think the Comptroller of New York had some -- asked the President to look into this, and I think he shares the Comptroller's outrage in this.
Q    Two things.  One, he met with CEOs yesterday, and I realize that's before the Comptroller's report, but did he say anything about this?  Because the two gentlemen who introduced him yesterday, their combined five-year compensation package was $150 million.  Did he turn to them and say, you guys are cutting jobs and yet you're making $150 million?
MR. GIBBS:  The President talked about responsibility with them yesterday.  The President doesn't meet with CEOs where he doesn't talk about responsibility.  They specifically talked about the jet purchase. 
Again, I think the President has been very clear on the notion that what has to be done will not be able to be done unless the American people have confidence not just in the decisions that government is now forced to make to address these crises, but more importantly, that they don't see some of these actors behaving differently.
Q    If I can just follow up.  In the TARP legislation last fall, when the President was a mere senator, it was clear for any of us who were following the legislation that executive compensation, the steps that they were taking to have taxpayer dollars not go to that, were minuscule at best, and the people who were preventing anything from really happening were Chris Dodd and Barney Frank, because they didn't think that there was really anything you could do, that there would be a way that Wall Street would find their way around whatever law.  I mean, President Obama supported the legislation.
MR. GIBBS:  President Obama, or mere Senator Obama, and many others did in order to get the money we needed to get our financial system going again.  I think it is fair that this President believes that the results of that first set of money have failed to live up to the expectation that all of the American people had for it.  That's why this administration and this economic team are taking the time to evaluate how we move forward.
Again, the principles that we outlined for the Senate, before they approved a second batch of money to be used by this administration, included reining in executive compensation and ensuring that excessive bonuses aren't part of that.
Again, part of the meeting that you'll see the beginning of today is a continued discussion on moving forward and making some of those decisions as it relates to that next set of money.  But, Dick, understand the President -- the President shares the American people's outrage on this.  You know, it's -- there are a lot of words that you can conjure up to describe that story.  I think "outrageous" was just the one that I can bring to you here today.
Q    Robert, on Tuesday you talked about how you felt that some Republicans would come onboard with the stimulus package.  Now we know that did not happen.  This morning you said that the President was a little disappointed.  I'm wondering if the President is -- in hindsight, is looking at this and saying perhaps there should have been more concessions, perhaps he shouldn't have made the joke about smacking me over the head.  Is he looking back and saying --
MR. GIBBS:  I don't think they're not going to do that.  I think -- (laughter) -- I think he seems fine with that recommendation.
Q    But is he thinking, if I had to do this all over again, I would have done it differently?
MR. GIBBS:  No, I think if he had it to do all over again -- and the truth is he has it to do all over now in the Senate and will have it to do -- I promise I won't make any -- I was looking up lacrosse metaphors, but I figured I just was way out of my league.
The President wouldn't do anything differently.  In fact, the President didn't do anything differently last night after the vote where, as you mentioned, none of the -- none of those Republicans supported the bill, but still came over to the White House to continue a cooperative relationship to get something done for the American people.
Look, old habits die hard in this town.  We get that.  But the President understands that changing the way Washington works isn't likely to happen in just 10 days.  But he believes that the time that he spent with Republicans when they asked to come down here and they did, or the time that he spent going to Capitol Hill, or the time that he spent last night is a worthy investment of his time. 
We have a responsibility -- the President and Congress, Democrats and Republicans -- to do something for the American people.  You know, probably each day that I've been here this week, we've had some statistic, at least in this town, to remind us of where we are.  The President I think looks forward to the day in which this government, and myself at this podium, aren't reminded each and every day about those statistics.
We saw earlier in the week businesses that are shedding I think 100,000 jobs in two or three days' time.  Tomorrow isn't going to be that day where we don't talk about these statistics, because we're likely to get a number for economic growth for the fourth quarter that's fairly staggering.  And today we find out that more Americans are receiving unemployment benefits since records began being kept on that statistic in 1967.
He believes that the time he put in and the time he will continue to put in to listen, to consult and to work with both Democrats and Republicans is important because we owe it to the American people to get them a piece of legislation that puts money back in their pockets, creates jobs and gets this economy moving again.
Q    And to follow, was the President caught off guard by the fact that 11 Republicans voted -- I'm sorry, Democrats, sorry -- voted against this?  And is he going to reach out specifically to the Democrats?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, we're -- nobody's looking at any label to see who to or not to reach out to.  His hand is -- is, was and will always reach out.  I think it's safe to say we didn't presume we'd get a hundred percent of anything.  We probably won't get a hundred percent of a proposal; we won't get a hundred percent support from either Republicans or Democrats.  Again, that doesn't stop the President's effort to push forward -- and I think we -- you know, we shouldn't lose sight of the fact that last night was a big step forward for the American people in getting that package one step closer to the President's desk and one step closer to making the lives of the American people a little bit better in what we all see as a very tough economic time.
Q    The tone here sounds like he's just going to continue doing what he did to try to get Republicans to vote for this in the House.  Doesn't he need to dramatically ratchet this up -- getting Democrats to compromise, working the Republicans, making changes in the bill?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, Chip, our test on this bill -- and our test on seeking these ideas -- is not whether they come from one party or whether they need to be compromised with another party.  Instead it's how best do we put forward a package that meets the principle of putting money into people's pockets, spending money to help lay some long-term investments for economic growth and put people back to work right now.
He doesn't believe -- and he's said this a number of times -- that any one party has dominion over good ideas.  We're going to continue to listen, strengthen the package.  I presume that the package that comes out of the Senate will be different than the one that came out of the House.  And as I've said, this will be a long and winding road to getting something on his desk.
Q    Can you give us any specifics on what he's doing, who he's calling, changes he's considering?  Any specifics on what he's going to do differently this time?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I don't -- I think I said earlier, I don't think he's going to do a ton differently.  The key is he's going to continue to listen and to reach out.  I think -- again, I think as we go forward on down this line, we'll see him continue to reach out.  And my presumption is that we'll pick up support on both sides of the aisle on this.
Q    How much, any guess, ballpark?
MR. GIBBS:  You can't use baseball analogies.  (Laughter.)
Q    I want to go to the strengthen -- you specifically used that word just now, actually, and in your statement yesterday, which implies that there are parts of this bill you guys don't like or would like to see improved.
MR. GIBBS:  Again, the President --
Q    Can you get into -- what is it that needs strengthening in this bill, period?  Or question mark.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I don't have specifics -- what's that?
Q    I'm sorry, I said period.  I should have said question mark.
MR. GIBBS:  I don't -- I don't have specifics to enumerate.  I think the President -- the President said to House Republicans and Senate Republicans that obviously the bill -- the bill that will work its way through both sides of the aisle is probably not exactly what any one person would write, regardless of their party.
Q    But there's got to be.  I mean, there must be --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, there already had been.  There had been.
Q    To put the word "strengthen" in there implies -- I mean, is it infrastructure?  Do you want more money for infrastructure?  The spending ratio is not correct here?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, we're working on -- as I've said, we're working on ensuring that those spending ratios get money into the economy quickly.  He talked with Republicans in the Senate about infrastructure spending.  He's talked to House and Senate members about tax provisions.  I don't -- you know, we'll -- we're going to continue to work with and listen to folks on any number of these items.
Q    Those are the two -- infrastructure, tax -- the two biggest areas, is that fair to say?
MR. GIBBS:  I would say two of many areas.  Again, Chuck, his test is this:  If you've got an idea that helps strengthen the bill, bring it to our attention and we'll work through that process.  Again -- again, I don't think this process -- it's not going to -- it didn't end last night.  Again, we took a very important step forward in getting legislation to the President's desk and hopefully legislation that will improve --
Q    I'd just go back to the word "strengthen."  That implies there was something you didn't quite like in the House bill.  Is there something that he singled out that --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think he singled out, over the course of the week, a couple of things that he didn't -- that he agreed with but he didn't -- or something he didn't think should be in the bill.  And we'll continue that process.
Mark.
Q    Was there serious talk about this at the cocktail party last evening?
MR. GIBBS:  I did not attend the cocktail party last evening.  I went home to read a book to my son.  I do believe -- well, did the subject come up?  Yes.  (Laughter.)
Q    "My Pet Goat"?
MR. GIBBS:  I did not read "My Pet Goat."  No, I read -- (laughter) -- I read something on mummies to Ethan.  But I -- yes, the subject certainly came up.  You know, the President also wanted last night to be a little bit more social, you know, so that individuals could better get to know each other and understand where they're coming from in these legislative disagreements.  But, again, you know, the President's outreach on this will continue.  We'll have some folks over probably this weekend to watch the Super Bowl.
Q    Members of Congress?  Leaders?
MR. GIBBS:  I will get a list of that for you.
Q    Journalists, members of the press?  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  But, you know, again, the President believes, and has believed this, that this type of outreach is important not just on this bill or on this issue but as a way of setting about a tone in Washington that can get things done for the American people.  Many of you heard the President often quote the ability to disagree without being disagreeable, and I think that's the tone that he'd like to see dominate these debates and dominate the issues that we discuss each day in Washington.
Q    On another matter, did the President ask the State Department or NSC staff to draft a conciliatory letter to Iran?
MR. GIBBS:  The President -- neither the President nor the Secretary of State has requested or seen any such letter that I think was reported in an overseas newspaper.  So I think that sort of closes the book a little bit on that.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, Mr. Elmendorf yesterday at CBO said that there are going to be billions and billions more needed for financial stability.  Does the White House concur in that?  And if so, how soon might we see a request?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, the financial team continues, the economic team continues to meet on this subject -- Chuck asked this yesterday -- to meet on -- and the President talked about this with leaders of Congress, he's talked about this with us -- and understanding that a recovery and reinvestment plan is just one part of what has to happen in going forward to get the economy moving again -- financial stability being a big chunk of that, in addition to financial reregulation, which he talked about yesterday with Paul Volcker.  Part of the meeting that the President will have today with Secretary Geithner will focus in on some of these -- some of these decisions. 
I don't know about specific spending numbers.  I know the President has talked about, and I think the American people understand, that this President will do what is necessary to ensure, one, that we don't suffer any sort of financial collapse and that we have the resources that we need to ensure that banks are lending money to families, to small businesses, and to large businesses.
I don't want to get ahead of those decisions coming to the President and him making them.  Obviously, again, it's a big part of many different avenues that we have to work through to get the economy moving again.
Major.
Q    Robert, on the stimulus, on the politics side, is the White House compiling, and will it release, as this debate moves forward, a state-by-state analysis of job losses?  And does it support the efforts of America Coming Together, MoveOn and other groups that were supportive of Senator Obama during the campaign putting together television ads and other things to put pressure on Republicans to get behind this stimulus effort?  Those are two political questions.  I have a policy one after that.
MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- well, let me -- if you can allow -- if you'll allow me to rephrase a little bit.  I think you're asking me about a story -- an earlier version of a story that I want to tell you doesn't reflect the President's thinking.  And I want to -- but I also want to split that off of different analysis of jobs numbers or transportation spending numbers or school rehabilitation numbers or any sort of analysis that the economic team may do. 
I just -- what I want to do is separate, I think, the political part of that story and the analysis that may be done not for political argument, but to show and demonstrate for the American people where the investments -- where the money is going and what investments they're going toward in this economic recovery plan.  We've certainly talked about individual projects.  We'll talk about the way money is certainly spent and the effect that it will -- we believe it will have on the economy.  I think those analysis are being done on both sides of this.  But the --
Q    The answer is yes, it's just not political?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, it's just not political.
Q    Understood.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Your policy question?
Q    The CBO was asked by Kent Conrad to evaluate any ways to more rapidly spend out the money that is in the stimulus bill.  And the CBO reported back to Kent Conrad that there are several ways to do it -- two specific ones I want to ask you about.
MR. GIBBS:  Okay.
Q    Waiving requirements for environmental and judicial reviews, and allowing contracts and grants to be awarded outside the normal competitive bid process.  Now, since those kinds of things or regulatory or speed bump things Democrats often supported, I'm wondering is the administration open to reviewing those kinds of things if in fact they impede spending of money that you believe would be essential to helping the economy recovery.
MR. GIBBS:  Let me give for you in this answer what the President told the governors when he met with them -- I guess this would have been sometime in mid- to late November in Philadelphia, because this was an issue that was raised I think maybe by Governor Schwarzenegger or by one of the other governors, regulatory red tape, so to speak.  And the President simply said, you know, if there are things that we can do to speed money into the economy as it relates to infrastructure spending or things like that, he's more than happy to take a look at them in order to get this money infused into the economy and putting people back to work as quickly as possible.
Q    Is he going to ask Democrats to put that specific language in the bill?  Because oftentimes that's what's required to get over these hurdles.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that we would want to look at exactly -- I've not looked at the CBO report that you mentioned specifically.  But all I can say, without reading what specifically they told Senator Conrad, but that the President shares the opinion of both Democrats and Republicans that we should seek to do this as quickly as is reasonably doable. 
And I was asked about this yesterday, about the notion of, well, if you only have 75 percent spent out in 18 months, what about this other 25 percent?  And I think it bears repeating that, regrettably, we are not likely to wake up on the 1st of January in 2011 and find everything going so great.  So there is money that we'll spend out after this 18-month period that will create jobs in that first and second quarter of 2011.  We don't see that as a bad thing, because we're going to need jobs created and money spent in that -- in those quarters in 2011, and certainly probably beyond that.
Q    Back on the politics thing, does the President endorse or support these outside groups pressuring Republicans with TV ads and other things?  Does he have any message for them --
MR. GIBBS:  The President is not going to referee what individual interest groups on either side of this do, except --
Q    Does he believe it enhances the political environment toward compromise?
MR. GIBBS:  I think the President -- I think the President's own actions in reaching out to Republicans demonstrate his willingness to do what is necessary to bring anybody involved in this process along so that he or she can support a recovery plan that the American people can be proud of.
Yes, sir.
Q    Martin Feldstein, who is a noted conservative economist who has been hailed by Democrats as sort of supporting the idea of a stimulus package, in today's Post wrote that -- called the stimulus "an $800 billion mistake," and detailed reasons why he thinks that the particular pieces in it are not actually stimulative and won't have the result -- I guess the question is, is the President open to conversations over the next couple of weeks with conservative economists who argue not that there shouldn't be a stimulus and not that it shouldn't even be as large -- some of them even want larger -- but that the pieces of this are the wrong piece, and is he open to potentially hearing their argument and potentially changing the plan?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me address a couple --
Q    And also, if you could tell us who he's supporting in the Super Bowl. 
MR. GIBBS:  All right, let me hold on that one for a second.  (Laughter.)  Let me take your tougher question first.
I think -- part of my answer bears on exactly part of your question, which is, you mentioned that even among economists, conservative ones, there's a -- there are varying opinions about the size of a stimulus package.  There are inherently different opinions about what should be encompassed in those varying sizes of stimulus packages.
I know that, if you go back and read the op-ed, I know that, for instance, one of the things that Mr. Feldstein mentions is he disagrees with the notion that the President's $500 tax cut will be paid out in a lump sum, and that's just not true. 
One of the reasons that we fashioned the tax cut in the way we did was precisely to take into account the notion -- and we've seen this in the past couple of stimulus attempts by Congress and the President -- that lump-sum payments that people tend to get, one-time checks tend to go into savings at a rate far greater than spending because people get this one-time check but understand that it's not going to continue, which causes them to save the money, which is why the tax cuts in the President's plan pay out a little bit at a time so that people that may get $20 or $25 more in each pay period will get used to spending that $20 to $25 each pay period.  They'll understand that if I get it today, because I got paid, that I'll get it in two weeks because I get paid, and I can change my spending habits by that amount of money through the course of the tax cut.
I do think there are some just general disagreements -- as you mentioned, disagreements even among conservative economists.  There's disagreements about what we believe creates jobs and what Mr. Feldstein might believe.
Q    I guess the broader question is, you talk about him wanting to reach out to Republicans and change the tone.  Has he -- does he have any interest in bringing some of these folks into the White House and sitting down --
MR. GIBBS:  I don't know the precise answer to whether he's interested in bringing some of those people down per se to talk.  Obviously he's -- he reads the fine Washington Post and listens to their arguments.  Again, you know, I think if you look at other -- others -- some that helped Senator McCain that have weighed in on what they think is a quality stimulus package.  But again, he is always open to listening to ideas from across the political spectrum and different political parties.
Q    And the Super Bowl question?
MR. GIBBS:  Oh, the Super Bowl question.  I have not asked him specifically who he is rooting for, but I will -- which I will do.  I know he has a tremendous respect and affection for the Rooney family, who we saw at many different points along the campaign trail.  The best breakfast place we went to in the entire campaign was a place that we went with Mr. Rooney in Pittsburgh --
Q    The Steelers --
MR. GIBBS:  Exactly.  And so I -- without prejudging who he roots for, I know he has tremendous affection for the Rooney family.
Jonathan.
Q    You've talked for a couple of weeks now about the multi-leg -- is it three-legged or four-legged stool?  And I'm wondering when you're going to show us a little more leg.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Only I can do that in here, Jonathan.  You can't --
Q    What are those legs?  What are those legs, specifically?  And when are we going to hear anything about the housing plan, about the financial rescue plan and about this reregulation?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, as I said earlier, meetings on each of those continue.  Again, the President met with Mr. Volcker yesterday to talk about regulation.  He met with his economic team this morning as part of his daily briefing on financial stability and the recovery plan. 
And I've done this a couple different ways in here.  But I think roughly you have -- whether you're talking about stools or pillars or what have you -- three main areas:  you have a recovery and reinvestment plan, which is moving through Congress; you have a financial stability package; and you have financial reregulation.  I think involved in some of that in different areas is a housing plan and things like that. 
I don't know that it's tremendously pertinent to get caught up in whether there are three stools -- three legs on this stool or four, or rungs, or what have you.  I think the American people understand that we have to deal with -- and the President also understands that we have to deal with each of these in order to move the economy forward.  I'm not sure which part of the -- which leg housing is.  But I think people that understand -- whether you're living in a neighborhood where the house next to you got foreclosed, or you're not now living in the neighborhood because the house you are in got foreclosed -- you may not understand which leg of the stool you're on, but you understand it's a problem that has to be dealt with.
We'll have I think soon more information and more on many of the things that you mentioned, be it housing, be it regulation, be it financial stability, that members of the Cabinet and the President will talk about.
Q    A follow-up on that?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes.
Q    The international aspect of that, the international leg of the stool that was discussed by the G20, and it is supposed to be discussed in London, people say that it's not moving anywhere, specifically the Russians are -- and not only the Russians -- they are complaining that the Financial Stability Forum, which is like the setup that's in the focus right now, they agree that all the major countries should be in, but the BRIC countries -- Brazil, Russia, India, China -- they're not there.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think what the -- and the President talked about this when he was a mere senator and a candidate -- that if one entity takes steps and it's not followed by other countries taking steps, be it regulation, stability or stimulus, that you're likely to see capital flows change all around the world, you could -- we certainly saw it back in September.
The President talked about -- again, the candidate Obama talked about that in September, working together in unison, all of these countries.  And I think you'll hear more about some of those specific plans as we lead to and get closer to going in April to the second round of this in Europe.
Q    Back to Iran, the President of Iran, President Ahmadinejad's speech yesterday calling for profound changes in U.S. policy, an end to support of murdering Zionists, and an apology for U.S. crimes.
MR. GIBBS:  I think it's best to instead focus not on what the leader of -- one of the leaders of Iran might have said, but instead what the President believes:  that we must use all elements of our national power to protect our interest as it relates to Iran.  That includes -- as the President talked about in the campaign -- diplomacy where possible, and that we have many issues to work through.  An illicit nuclear program by the Iranians, the sponsorship of terrorism, and the threatening of peace in Israel are just a few of the issues that this President believes the Iranian leadership should address.
Q    The dialogue you speak of, can the President have a dialogue with someone who speaks in those terms?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, as the President said back in the campaign, it's unclear who -- exactly who that dialogue would be with in Iran.  Again, if -- in order for this to happen, there has to be some preparation and an understanding and a responsibility by both sides in understanding what's going to be talked about, and the responsibilities that each side has.
Q    Now that the Congress has acted, or I guess not acted, where is the President on the digital TV conversion?  Does he believe that doing it as scheduled on February 17th is going to cause undo hardship and confusion?  And if so, is there anything unilaterally he can do to postpone it?
MR. GIBBS:  A good question that -- let me take.  I don't -- obviously during the transition the President's team asked that Congress consider this.  The Senate did and the House did not.  So let me take that question and --
Q    Can I follow that up?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, sir.
Q    Thank you so much.  A number of Democrats in Congress want to restore the so-called Fairness Doctrine, which before it was repealed applied to only electronics media and not to any print or media --
MR. GIBBS:  Lester, I thought we were -- I thought we were talking about DTV.
Q    Well, does the President believe that -- (laughter) -- this is on the same planet --
MR. GIBBS:  I'm pretty sure I did not -- I don't think I got an answer to my question.  I think we were talking about DTV, and now we seem to be somewhat -- I'm going to go back to baseball -- far field on the Fairness Doctrine.
Q    Since you mentioned it, from the field, does the President believe -- (laughter) -- does the President believe --
Q    Lester, far field?
Q    Does the President believe that the selectivity of some media and not others is fair?  And if so, why?
MR. GIBBS:  I have no information on the Fairness Doctrine, and I will endeavor to get some clarity on DTV. 
Sheryl.
Q    Robert, something you said earlier struck me.  You said that it's going to take longer than 10 days to sort of change the ways of Washington.  Does the President believe that the vote in the House was the result of sort of the deep ingrained patterns of the parties voting along party lines, or does he think that it was the result of philosophical differences over whether this bill would in fact work?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that's in many ways a question to ask those that exercised that vote yesterday.
Q    Well, no, you're assessing the bill and the vote and the way --
MR. GIBBS:  It's hard for me to speak to the mindset of -- either collectively or individually -- members of Congress.  The President and his team formulated a proposal that they thought, and a framework and principles, that they thought would put money back in people's pockets and spend money to create jobs.  That's what we endeavor to do, and what the process endeavors to do as it moves forward.
Q    Can I follow on that, though?
Q    Robert, you're the one that said, "changing the ways of Washington."  What did you mean by that?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think there's any number of ways.  I mean, obviously we've had a several-day discussion about bipartisanship.  We've had -- we've talked about different vote counts.  We've talked about nominations and confirmations.  And we've seen somebody -- certainly some people in this room seem surprised at the lengths the President will go to to reach out to the other party, regardless of the results that happen on any given day. 
But that's not going to change the President's desire to do that reaching out, and to try, as I said earlier, figure out a way that even while we disagree we don't have to do it in a way that's disagreeable. 
Q    Well, I guess the question is, doesn't your statement imply that it was politics as usual?  If you say, there were no Republicans, it's going to take awhile to change the ways of Washington, doesn't that imply that it was a political move by the Republicans? 
MR. GIBBS:  Again, I'd leave it some to them to figure out motivations.  I think we all believe -- Democrat or Republican, Congress or the executive branch -- that we're going to be held accountable to the American people to get something done.  Again, whether it's unemployment claims, whether it's GDP numbers, whether it's layoffs, we're in a crisis that requires us acting quickly to get something done. 
Q    Robert, real quick on Iran, a follow-up.  Is it the President's view that the military option with Iran is still on the table?
MR. GIBBS:  The President hasn't changed his viewpoint that he should preserve all his options.
David.
Q    On the question of bipartisanship, you keep talking about the President wanting to reach out and continue to take in ideas.  The House Republican Whip just sent out an email this afternoon, even while you were talking, accusing the White House of issuing political threats rather than engaging in bipartisan activity, and actually naming you as one of the people making threats.  Can you engage in bipartisan activity if you're being accused of making political threats against the Republicans? 
MR. GIBBS:  I don't think I've been -- I don't –
Q    That's what Cantor is saying.
MR. GIBBS:  Again, it's hard for me to step into the mindset of any individual and talk about the motivations for why they think I'm threatening people.  I don't --
Q    You're really innocent?  You're really innocent?
Q    But is there a fallacy --
MR. GIBBS:  I guess --
Q    You're talking --
MR. GIBBS:  I think many people in this room have written that -- when I seem to be overbearing, in their words, that I don't think I leave a lot of misimpression as to what that overbearing might be.  So I think I've been fairly mild-mannered today.  I don't think I've -- at least to my knowledge, not threatened anybody.
But, you know, again, I -- I think this is a little bit about what I talked about, about changing the way Washington works, you know?  You know, I mean --
Q    Can you change -- but what I'm asking --
MR. GIBBS:  But let me finish --
Q    -- can you change it from just one end of Pennsylvania Avenue?
MR. GIBBS:  No, but I don't think we're going to.  I think the American people will demand that we change it at both ends.  And I don't think that we're going to be able to address America's problems unless or until we do so.  But, you know, I think it's important not to get caught up in a typical email back and forth between this podium and the Congress and that sort of thing, you know.  As I said, the President understands that old habits die hard, and that's not going to stop him from working each and every day to make sure that something gets done worthwhile for the American people.
Jonathan.
Q    Robert, is there anything -- is there anything -- two questions.  Is there anything in the stimulus bill that the President considers as sacrosanct?  And then -- that he wouldn't  negotiate over.  And then secondly, the President's home team, the White Sox, as you know, had invited him to toss out the opening pitch -- a long tradition for Presidents.  Is he going to do that at Comiskey, or will he choose perhaps the Nationals here in Washington or the new Yankee stadium up in the Bronx?
MR. GIBBS:  Wow.  A plethora of choices.  (Laughter.)  See, Washington -- we have choices for questions.  I saw the invitation from the White Sox.  I will check on that.  He did that before and it was a lot of fun.
Q    -- double-header.
MR. GIBBS:  There you go.  We could go to the Nationals game and maybe the White Sox, too.
Q    He wants to, I assume, right?
MR. GIBBS:  And -- oh, he loves that.  So -- I'm sorry, your first --
Q    Is there anything in the stimulus package that he considers as sacrosanct, that he wouldn't be able to negotiate over?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think you've heard the President talk about believing that the "Make Work Pay" tax cut that he ran on in the campaign and -- that is part of this bill -- is something that he believes quite strongly in.  And I think -- as he listens to other ideas, I think he's -- I think he's decided both as a campaign platform and, more importantly, what makes good economic sense is to put money back into the pockets of people who have watched their wages decline as they've worked harder, as their bills have gotten more expensive, as their expenses have mounted.  And I think that's something that in the meeting both here at the White House and up on Capitol Hill -- I think it's been reported that he said that he felt comfortable with those provisions.
Q    Could I follow up on the rationale on that?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes. 
Q    Could I just follow up on the rationale on that?  Because one of the major problems out there is consumer debt and you're saying that, first of all, you'd like to discourage savings like --
MR. GIBBS:  Hold on, hold on, hold on.  Let me just stop you about halfway.  The question that was asked was about Mr. Feldstein's op-ed as it related to a lump-sum payment.  And all I -- I did not discourage -- I hope everyone saves money -- I didn't discourage savings.  I simply said that if you look at the economic principles of a lump-sum payment in the form of a $300 check, as been given before, or a $500 check for a worker in this plan, or a $1000 check for a family that has two workers, that economic studies show that lump-sum payments tend not to be spent out as quickly or as fully because people and consumers recognize that it's a one-time payment that they're not going to see during their next paycheck. 
The point of an economic stimulus plan is to get money into people's hands and into people's pockets so that they use their hand to reach in their pocket and spend that money.  That's what a payment like the one we have structured will do because, again, it provides that money out over a period of time where they get used to spending that money every two weeks.
So I'm not discouraging savings.  I don't -- I'm pretty sure that my answer was quite clear on the fact that that was not the case.
Q    I guess the question, though, is consumer behavior.  And with the rebate, it was hoped that people would spend it, when in fact many of them ended up using it to pay off credit card debt, paying for, you know, higher price of gas.  And I guess if you're just giving out a small portion per pay period, aren't people just as likely to use that as paying off their credit cards than to spend money that they don't have?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me try this -- let me -- I'm going to swing a third time and see if I can hit this baseball.  I'll try to do it -- I know, I had to get to it.
Again, I think economic studies show -- and I will endeavor to get you one of these economic studies -- is that if you want to get people -- through a tax cut -- money that they're more likely to save -- or I'm sorry -- more likely to spend faster is to do so by spreading it out so that their consumer behavior is augmented by the fact that they understand that that money is coming every pay period; versus giving it to them in one lump sum where, attitudinally, they understand that it's not likely to change.
So I think that's the reason why the structure of our tax cut in terms of "Make Work Pay" is done that way.  It's tilted toward lower- and middle-income individuals and families who are likely to take that money and spend it and get this economy moving again.
Yes, sir.
Q    The President seems to have deferred a little bit to the House Democrats during this process and now, presumably, he'll let the Senate process run its course.  When you get to negotiations between the two houses -- I realize I'm getting a little ahead of the game, but we're kind of curious -- will the President get involved personally at that level or will he leave it to his economic team?  Does he intend to sit down with the leaders of the two parties to try to work out a deal?
MR. GIBBS:  I wouldn't -- I don't know the exact answer.  I wouldn't -- I think that's a strong possibility.  I mean, I think he's largely, in some ways, out of the legislative process by dint of trading one job for the next.  But I don't think I would close the door in any way on the notion that he'll get involved.
Q    Corollary to that, Robert, when the President went to the Hill on Tuesday, Republicans told him they had been shut out of the negotiations.  Might he have leaned on Speaker Pelosi a little more to facilitate negotiations?
MR. GIBBS:  Again, Kirk, you know, when the -- I guess I don't altogether agree with that notion, largely because you can see provisions in this bill that are directly reflective of the input that they've given.  Net operating loss is a provision in there that I think some wanted to take out, but then the President and his team asked that it be kept in.  The -- there's certainly energy provisions in there that are reflective of work that Democrats and Republicans have done together on important issues that will increase the number of clean energy jobs in this country. 
And I think I used this example yesterday with my -- of my friend, who apparently is emailing around, that the Whip said to the President of the United -- to the President-elect then, you know, it would be -- give the American people great confidence if we put these projects up on the Internet and for everyone to see how the money was spent and how the jobs would be created.  And that's exactly the intention that the President and his team have.
So I think the input of -- the input has been there.  I think the legislation is reflective of that.  And I think the President will continue, again, to listen to those ideas so that anybody that has a good idea will be heard.
Q    So you've got no regrets about how you all handled it?
MR. GIBBS:  Again, I think we -- you know, sometimes it might not all look like it pays off at the beginning, but I think the President believes that the time that he's spent here and on Capitol Hill and talking to members was time well spent and time that he'll continue to do.
Q    Thank you.
MR. GIBBS:  Thanks, guys.
END                  3:05 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 2/2/09
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                  

February 2, 2009 


PRESS BRIEFING BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room

1:49 P.M. EST


MR. GIBBS: How are you guys? Happy Groundhog Day.

Q Same to you.

MR. GIBBS: Let me make a couple of quick announcements and some stuff and then we'll take some of your questions.

At the invitation of Senator Dick Durbin, President Obama will travel to Springfield, Illinois, on Tuesday, February 12th, to attend the commemoration of Lincoln's 200th birthday. He will attend and speak at the banquet there -- for your travel planning purposes.

Secondly, the President spoke with -- and we'll have a readout shortly -- with Prime Minister Maliki and President Talabani in Iraq this morning. So we'll have some more information on that.

And then before I take questions, let me just go through -- obviously this is another important week for the economic recovery package as it winds it way now through the Senate. You saw the President met with NGA Vice Chair, Republican Governor Jim Douglas of Vermont, who I think spoke to the needs of the people that live in his state, in Vermont. They've seen the unemployment rate go from 3.9 percent one year ago to 6.4 percent last month. We'll get new economic and unemployment numbers, as you well know, on Friday.

But the President understands, and I think Congress does, too, that the American people are hurting and are in need of some help. Each and every day we hear and the American people hear the stats, the government statistics that underscore the challenges that we face as a people and that we face as a country.

The President is pleased with the package that passed the House. Undoubtedly that package will be strengthened and changed some through the process, but it meets the test that the President laid out originally to, first and foremost, create jobs immediately and to strengthen, for the long term, our economic growth. Again, first and foremost, the plan, the President believes, will save or create 3 to 4 million new jobs -- 3 to 4 million jobs, and put people immediately back to work, which is what's needed in this economy.

The plan also invests in the jobs of tomorrow through long-term investments, as I said, to help sustainable economic growth. One example is in alternative energy, doubling renewable energy generating capacity in just three years, and make ourselves less dependent on foreign oil. Secondly, the bill contains -- not just for a bill this size, but for any piece of legislation -- unprecedented accountability and transparency. There are no earmarks in this bill. The information on the projects that will be funded in this legislation will be available online, as you know, at www.recovery.gov. There will be an oversight board that will monitor the progress of each project and address any problems that are involved early and aggressively.

Third, as you know, there's a major investment in this plan in infrastructure. The Senate bill alone contains about $123 billion, again, that will create jobs not just immediately, but lay the foundation for more job growth in the future. Whether it's that new energy economy, whether we are building roads or bridges, or fixing waterways, or investing in long-delayed flood control projects, or creating 21st century classrooms in our schools, this plan makes those necessary and often ignored investments.

Next, this bill also puts needed money back into consumers' pockets, the consumers that need it the most -- middle class families that have seen their wages decline far longer than what the economists say this recession -- for the length of this recession.

So taken as a whole, this proposal will invest in America today by creating jobs, but it will pave the way for sustained economic growth through long-term investments that America and families all across the country so desperately need.

So I'll take a few questions. Ms. Loven.

Q Thank you. On Tom Daschle -- I just want to step back just a minute -- I understand the President's remarks that he absolutely stands by him. But if you could just take a step back, you've got two nominees now who have had to pay more than $100,000 in back taxes. That's an awful lot of money. That's more than most people in the country make in a year, much less that they owe in taxes. What kind of a message does this send, do you think? How are people supposed to kind of get their heads around that and accept that as top people in your administration?

MR. GIBBS: Well, let me also step back and say that no one in this building or in this administration is insensitive to the report that we were -- that was given this weekend about Senator Daschle. I think that includes Senator Daschle. He discovered a mistake, mistakes he'd made on his taxes, and he's paid now what he owed and paid interest on that.

As it relates to Senator Daschle -- and I know he's meeting with the Finance Committee now -- we believe that the committee and the Senate as a whole will examine not just one mistake in a career, but look at that longer, three-decade career of public service, serving this country, serving the constituents both in South Dakota and across America.

The President believes that Senator Daschle is the right person for the very important job of ensuring that we cut costs, reform our health care system, and finally give the American people in health care the outcomes that they deserve. We spend more money on health care than any other nation in the country [sic], but don't get the quality of care that many other countries get.

So again, I think the Senate will lay a serious but corrected mistake against that three-decade career in public service. And in the end, the Finance Committee and the Senate as a whole will vote to extend his career in public service so that he can take on the very important task to America to reform that health care system and cut our costs.

Q Is the President at all embarrassed by this? And does he see that there's any problem in the vetting that you all do --

MR. GIBBS: I don't think that we believe there's any problem in the vetting. When I say that no one is insensitive to the report in this building, that includes the President of the United States. He understands that.

Yes, sir.

Q The President is meeting with Secretary Gates today. Will they be discussing the Pentagon's recommendations for troop increases in Afghanistan? Any idea how long it will take for him to act on --

MR. GIBBS: I don't know exactly what is on the itinerary. This is part of what will be a standing meeting with the President and the Secretary of Defense. I'm a little leery of the some of the news reports about the President and the Secretary discussing an increase in 15,000 troops because I'm reminded that just four weeks ago, the then President-elect, without the constitutional authority to do so -- according to many of the newspapers I read and some of the cable television I watched -- approved 30,000 troops to Afghanistan. So I'm a tad leery to get ahead of --

Q Well, which is right?

MR. GIBBS: Well, Helen, you appropriately ask and when the President stands up at a podium not unlike this one and announces the end of the administration's review of our policy in Afghanistan and our troop levels -- not just in Afghanistan, but as it relates to Iraq -- I think we'll have a more definitive answer that doesn't rely on what may not be decisions that are at this point fully made.

Q Robert, this morning the President spoke about narrow differences with Republicans on the stimulus plan. When you hear some of the Republican senators on Sunday talk shows they sound like it's not a narrow difference, they want to chuck whole sections of the bill that's working through the Senate. Is there a gulf there between what the President is saying and what Republicans in the Senate are saying, number one? And number two, are there specific things you want out? You've previously been outspoken about removing provisions -- there's this STD prevention provision, for example, a lot of Republicans have been going after -- are there specific things you want to keep in there or take out?

MR. GIBBS: Well, let's focus -- I watched -- I didn't watch many of the news shows; I read some transcripts; I read press releases from Senate Republicans, one last week about what they deemed unnecessary spending, which I think when you accumulated it up they added up to $699 million. The reason I'm here is because I'm not very good at math. But that amounts to 7/100ths of 1 percent of a piece of legislation that the American people desperately need to get back to work.

I know there's a tendency to focus on that 7/100ths of 1 percent.

Q But when you have Democrats like Ben Nelson, for example, saying he wants to turn this into a jobs bill instead of a spending bill, it doesn't sound like that seven, you know, of 1 percent -- it sounds like a big, big difference.

MR. GIBBS: I think what the President would tell Senator Nelson, the President would tell any senator, and what he'll tell Democrats when they come down to the Hill -- come down to the White House later today, he's satisfied that we have the basis of a proposal that will save or create 3 to 4 million jobs, and that the American people can be confident of that. We've got an investment in infrastructure unlike we've seen since the 1950s in the institution of the Interstate Highway System under President Eisenhower. We're putting money back in people's pockets that need it the most and who are likely -- not simply because of their declining income, but their increasing bills -- they will spend that money and get the economy moving again.

Again, I think that what you are watching and what you see sometimes on the Sunday shows is an argument about a very small portion of a piece of legislation. I think the President believes, and his team believes, that if members will step back and look at not just 7/100ths of 1 percent -- you heard me say this last week -- but the 93/100ths of the 99 percent of the legislation, that you'll find -- somebody did the math for me -- (laughter) -- you'll find that this meets the President's standard of stimulating the economy, creating jobs, investing in our long-term economic growth through creating jobs in things like a new energy economy that will also make us less dependent on foreign oil; that we do so in a way that's accountable and transparent to taxpayers; and we do it in a way that gets that money quickly into this economy; that delaying is -- delay in this town may not mean much, but delay in America means that the help that the American people need right now won't get to them as quickly as they need it to.

Q Can you just clarify the jobs number, too -- last thing. You just said 3 to 4 million jobs. The President two weekends ago in his radio address used that figure. But this past weekend he said over 3 million jobs. He didn't say 3 to 4 [million jobs], number one. And number two, during the transition -- during the transition, he had said that the jobs number would be created over his first two years in office --

MR. GIBBS: This is a two-year bill. The bill that we're talking about is a two-year bill.

Q In his radio address over the weekend, he said over the next few years. He didn't say over the next two years. Can you just clarify --

MR. GIBBS: I'll certainly go back and --

Q -- what is the presidential promise to the American people about how many --

MR. GIBBS: I'll go back and look at it, Ed. For purposes of this event, 3 to 4 million jobs saved or created. Again --

Q Over two years or --

MR. GIBBS: Yes. I mean, we -- I'll go back and we'll clarify what all the different numbers are, but the bottom line is this: You've got a piece of legislation that creates jobs. You know, we can -- and certainly there's going to be -- the process will go forward. This bill will go to the Senate. There will be amendments that will -- that may change this or that. We've already seen the -- probably the biggest amendment in either House so far was authored by a Republican to add tax cuts to the proposal. So I think the notion that somehow people -- Republicans aren't involved in this process is about $70 billion off.

Jake.

Q Two questions. One, on Tom Daschle, is the President at all concerned that the continuing problem of members of your Cabinet, or aspiring members of your Cabinet, to pay their taxes according to the law will undercut either the President's rhetoric on an era or responsibility, or the fact that your health plan and your tax plans going forward are likely going to be asking American -- some Americans to pay more in taxes?

And then the second question, to follow up on one of Ed's things, what would the President like to see added to the stimulus package so as to attract Republican supporters, since obviously the leaders of the House and Senate -- Democratic leaders of the House and Senate aren't reaching out enough to do so.

MR. GIBBS: I think I'd dispute the -- at least the last phrase of that question. I mean, I think, unless I read Senator Schumer's remarks incorrectly in the paper today, I think there will be proposals voted on this week to increase the money that's involved for infrastructure despite the money that's already there. I think that's -- was certainly something Republicans mentioned when the President met last week. I think there's -- they may add money on a tax cut for home ownership that I think is offered by a Republican.

I would, first of all, I guess, begin by disputing the notion that somehow --

Q Okay, forget the last clause. What do you want to see added to the bill?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I -- any idea that we think will help make this bill better.

Q Robert, specifically what?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I'm going to leave the legislating to the legislators. The President believes the basis for what we have right now is quite good. Obviously this bill will go through the process and likely will be strengthened as we go forward. Whether that's adding money for homeowners, whether that's adding money for additional infrastructure, the President will certainly look at that. Obviously those are cares and concerns of his. But again, that's something that will happen up on Capitol Hill and the President looks forward to the process continuing in a timely way to get help to the American people.

Q I had a question about Tom Daschle, too.

MR. GIBBS: Well, hit that again. I was just -- 

Q Whether or not the President is at all concerned that with Geithner and now with Daschle, all these -- almost $200,000 in unpaid taxes, that this is going to undercut the President's cry for an era of responsibility, or the fact that he's --

MR. GIBBS: No, I mean --

Q -- going to be asking for people to pay more in taxes.

MR. GIBBS: Well, let's not -- I don't want to get ahead of budget discussions or what have you --

Q He said it on the campaign trail, that he's going to ask for some people to pay more in taxes.

MR. GIBBS: Right. The President, again, is not insensitive to -- at all -- to the reports that are out there, but believes that both Secretary Geithner and Secretary-designate Daschle are the right people for very important jobs, and he does not believe that that will undercut their ability to move forward on a agenda that makes sense for the American people.

Q You said you're going to leave the legislating to the legislators. Is the President leaving the legislating to the legislators? Is he not getting -- are you suggesting that --

MR. GIBBS: No, I think he's going --

Q -- he's not getting involved in specifics?

MR. GIBBS: No, I'm not going to get into amendment voting. I've received far fewer than the necessary number of votes to participate actively as a member of the United States Senate.

Q But he is getting in there and telling them what he likes in terms of particular programs and proposals, right?

MR. GIBBS: The President is going to meet with -- you know, obviously the President had members of Congress over last night for the Super Bowl. The President will meet with leaders from -- Democratic leaders from the House and the Senate later this afternoon here at the White House. I think the first message he have -- will have for them is thanking them for their speedy work on getting this process -- this important process for the American people started. The House and the Senate thus far have -- the House has moved forward on an economic recovery plan. We've got a fair pay piece of legislation that's made it through both chambers and landed on the President's desk, that he signed. We anticipate, with some work this week, that additional legislation covering 4 to 5 million more children that currently lack health care will be up for the President's signature.

So there's a lot to thank Congress for already in just the first two weeks of this administration. They will talk about how to move forward on the recovery plan. No doubt they'll talk about ways to strengthen the bill as we go forward. The President is actively involved in the discussions on how to get this passed. You saw it today with the Republican governor here from Vermont.

Q But is he getting down in the weeds? Is he really getting down to the level of specific programs?

MR. GIBBS: Let's hope not. (Laughter.) I think that's some of what we have staff for --

Q On Daschle, one question. Some of his defenders on the Hill and in the administration are calling this a bump in the road. Does the President consider failure to pay over $100,000 in taxes a bump in the road?

MR. GIBBS: The President understands that the report that we saw this weekend is very serious, that Senator Daschle is going to meet with the committee and talk with them about the concerns that they have. The President also believes that Senator Daschle continues to be the right person for the job of -- the very big job of making sure our health care system works for everyday Americans.

Chuck.

Q I was struck by your opening statement in that it seemed to be a reiteration of talking points that you've used on the stimulus before, rather than some sort of new --

MR. GIBBS: That seemed a bit gratuitous -- (laughter.)

Q Do you feel like you were losing -- that basically the Republicans have done a better job of framing your bill?

MR. GIBBS: No, I -- if I can be equally gratuitous, I think there's a tendency in this town, as I said, to cover 7/100ths of 1 percent of a piece of legislation.

Q And by focusing on that it seems like you are acknowledging that --

MR. GIBBS: Where I'm focusing is --

Q -- that having to answer for 7/100ths of 1 percent that somebody else is --

MR. GIBBS: They've clearly gotten you to do that.

Q I don't know if I speak for --

MR. GIBBS: But again, let's step back and understand what the basis of this legislation is and what it does. That's why economists from Democrats and Republicans, liberal and conservative, believe that this is a good bill; that it will move this economy forward, put people back to work, make the investments that we've ignored for years and years and years, do so in a way that is accountable and transparent to the American taxpayers, and will put money back in middle-class pockets.

Q And on the -- Senator Daschle, is the President concerned -- you've written the executive order about lobbying and the administration, Congress has passed laws about former members -- but is the President concerned of how easily -- how easy it is for former members to essentially cash in and make seven-figure salaries so quickly? Yes, they're not registering to lobby, and you went through this very meticulously last week. You were asked a question about George Mitchell, well, he doesn't technically lobby. Well, somebody is paying Senator Daschle a lot of money to advise them maybe on how to lobby or something. Does that concern the President that it's so easy in this town, that the way Washington works --

MR. GIBBS: Well, I -- Chuck, I think that the American people voted to change the way Washington works, and that's what the President is working on doing. Whether it's in how government conducts its business, or in how we get a recovery plan to put people back to work; whether it's restoring our image and respect in the world; whether it's making the investments in energy and health care and education that we for so long neglected, I think all of that is --

Q Going to Jake's question, don't you worry that Senator Daschle getting there -- essentially undercuts --

MR. GIBBS: No, I don't -- my answer to Jake's question is the same -- 

Q -- but actually undercuts the image that you're trying to --

MR. GIBBS: No, I don't believe it does. Nobody is perfect. It was a serious mistake, one that he caught and remedied. We think he is still the best person to do health care reform and shepherd that very complicated process through Congress to achieve savings and cut costs for the American people.

Jon.

Q In both those cases, the Geithner case and the Daschle case, you've had that line. You said that Tim Geithner was the perfect and only candidate who could handle that job at this time. You're now saying that Tom Daschle -- 

MR. GIBBS: I don't think I said he was the only one. I think he was the best suited.

Q But -- and Tom Daschle now is the best suited for this particular job. But when does President Obama say, look, I campaigned against the ways of Washington and it's time to take a stand. And we are -- we're seeing information coming out about -- about Senator Daschle that you were privy to, that the Obama transition office was privy to, for quite some time. You pushed ahead; so it wasn't a question of vetting. It was a question of you deciding that these -- the infraction was not worth pulling the name. And I'm wondering when -- what would be worth pulling the name?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I -- we could get into all sorts of hypotheticals. But I think the last part that you touched on is a reiteration of what I've said earlier. It's a serious mistake, but laying that mistake next to a three decade career in public service, the President believes that Senator Daschle is still the best suited to shepherd health care reform through Congress and get something to the President's desk that will save the American people money and make the quality of health care far better. That's the -- that's what he -- that's what he sought when he looked for people to enter this administration, and we believe that the team that we've assembled and that is being approved by the Senate meets that test and will improve the lives of the American people.

Yes, sir.

Q When was the last time the President spoke to Senator Daschle about this serious but corrected mistake?

MR. GIBBS: I don't know the answer to that.

Q Do you know when the last time he spoke to him about anything was?

MR. GIBBS: No, I just said I don't know the answer to when --

Q Has he spoken to him specifically about this?

MR. GIBBS: I don't know if he has or not.

Yes.

Q Robert, you've used the word "strengthen" on the stimulus package several times today. What things would be deemed to be strengthening in this legislation, and will that be a topic of the meeting later this afternoon?

MR. GIBBS: Well, as I said, I -- it will be a topic of the meeting, along with -- well, again, I'm going to do this and do this in a way not different than the way I did it with Jake when he asked largely an analogous question without using the word I used. They're going to discuss what's in the bill, how the process is likely to change. Obviously you've got -- how the process is likely to change -- yes, and I mean, there's no question that you've got -- you've already got a different bill in the Senate than you did in the House. I think today also begins the process that is going to be -- going to have to undertake in order to reconcile those two bills and meet the President's deadline of getting something quickly to the American people.

Q Can you say, does it mean a bit more tax cuts, for example, more green projects? Give us --

MR. GIBBS: Again, there's proposals in the Senate to change and alter parts of the bill, whether it's infrastructure or tax cuts. We'll let the Senate work its will as it relates to this, as long as it meets the test that the President believes the legislation thus far meets, which is how do we save or create 3 to 4 million jobs? How do we put people back to work? How do we make the investments that we need to make right now, not just for the jobs -- for jobs to be created tomorrow, but for that sustained, long-term economic growth? All of those things are part of the bill, and all of those things will be topics of, I presume, of this meeting this afternoon.

Helen.

Q How far is the President willing to go to appease the Republicans in terms of home owners? He doesn't seem to be worried about foreclosures.

MR. GIBBS: Oh, I don't think that's true. I think you've not only seen the President talk about this throughout the transition and the campaign, also make commitments about how money would be spent in the future to ensure that home foreclosure is addressed. Again, the President said this more often and more eloquently than I have, that home foreclosure is not simply a problem for the person that lives in that home that's being foreclosed --

Q But he's going to drop it from the bill.

MR. GIBBS: Drop?

Q From the stimulus bill.

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think there's different proposals both in this bill and other vehicles that are moving in Congress to address different aspects of home foreclosure, be it bankruptcy provisions or homeownership rates or mortgage rates. This isn't, as the President has said, as I've said last week, this isn't the only thing that has to happen to this economy in order for it to get better. There's a financial stability package that will likely include some aspects to address homes and home foreclosures. There's a significant reregulation that needs to happen to ensure that the irresponsibilities that caused where we are now don't happen again. That's a meeting the President is going to have with bipartisan congressional leaders at the White House later this week.

So this isn't the only piece of legislation that will be moving, and it's not the only vehicle that the President strongly believes Congress must address to get the economy moving again.

Q But it won't be in this package.

MR. GIBBS: Well, when you say "this," there's a lot of different home foreclosure things that this administration and members on Capitol Hill are working on, a lot moving forward.

Yes, sir.

Q A couple on Daschle and a follow-up on a separate topic, if I may. When --

MR. GIBBS: Haven't you already asked, like, four questions -- (laughter.)

Q I want to get to Jonathan's question -- (laughter.)

Is there an amount of money in unpaid back taxes for any nominee to the President's Cabinet that would be considered disqualifying?

MR. GIBBS: As I said to Jonathan, I'm not going to get into hypotheticals as it relates to that.

Q Is there anything that you could tell the American public to make them as comfortable as the President is with the fact that after he left Congress, Senator Daschle gave speeches and at times received income from some of the very same industries in health care that he would be taking a large role in supervising and regulating as Secretary of Health and Human Services

MR. GIBBS: Well, I can tell the American people that Senator Daschle, our Secretary-designate, when he's approved by the committee and by the full Senate, will follow closely the ethical guidelines and rules of this administration, and won't deal specifically with those entities.

Q Okay. Why is Judd Gregg at the top of the list for Commerce? And just as a general principle, does the President believe the Democratic Party -- the Democratic governor should fill vacancies created in the Senate with Democrats?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I'm not going to get ahead of the President on making personnel announcements. We hope to announce a --

Q The White House said this weekend he's the leading candidate. I'm just curious why. 

MR. GIBBS: I read those articles. (Laughter.) I'm not going to get into -- obviously the President has great respect for Senator Gregg. I'm not going to get into personnel announcements before we are there. And as it relates to picking senators in states that need new senators, I think you can rest reasonably assured that this administration has had nothing and wants nothing to do with that going forward. (Laughter.) And I would bold and underline that.

Q What specifically is the President doing to ensure that the Finance Committee and members of the Senate are comfortable with the Tom Daschle position? Is he reaching out to them by phone? Is he involved in personally lobbying for his future?

MR. GIBBS: I don't believe he's made calls. I know staff probably has, and I think you've seen -- I think the most vocal advocate right now for Senator Daschle is Senator Daschle. And I think you've seen the letter that was released this morning that was sent to the committee last night, and I think you've seen the chair of the committee, who's very important in this process and very interested in health care reform moving forward in this session of Congress, come out in support of Senator Daschle.

Yes, sir. Did you just trade seats to get at a better -- 

Q I did. (Laughter.) How do you know the bill will save or create 3 to 4 million jobs?

MR. GIBBS: That's what the Council on Economic Advisors has told the President based on estimates of what's in the proposal that they came up with and forwarded to Congress, based on direct spending, putting people -- putting money in people's pockets, and making the long-term investments that I've talked about.

Q Can you ever measure that? I mean, are you ever -- 

MR. GIBBS: Sure.

Q -- are you ever retrospectively able to know that a job has been saved?

MR. GIBBS: Sure. There was a report -- Columbus, Ohio: "Columbus police recruits are laid off before being sworn in. Columbus Police Academy recruits were told they would be laid off Tuesday, three days before their scheduled graduation. City officials said the layoffs were due to budget reasons."

I think it's safe to assume that if the President's package, which addresses the need to ensure that public safety isn't threatened in a recession, and money specifically for police officers -- my sense is that Columbus, Ohio is probably going to get some of that money. And if one of the 27 would-be graduates that were laid off before they got their would-be diplomas, I think that would count as a saved job.

Again, the analysis that the CEA did was what would happen to the economy without a significant economic stimulus. A similar study in recognition of these facts were done by the Congressional Budget Office, which showed a far deeper recession without some recovery and reinvestment plan. You can see what the arc of those jobs numbers would be without a stimulus, and what our economic team believes that arc would be with a stimulus.

Q I guess I understand that example, but I'm wondering if just -- you're setting off something that -- you're talking about hundreds of thousands of jobs. Are you ever going to be able to measure that this bill succeeded in saving those jobs? I mean, who can tell exactly why some people are let go and exactly what the process -- it's so complicated.

MR. GIBBS: Well, I mean, I don't doubt that it's complicated. But again, people far better at math and carrying numbers are working on what happens without a stimulus and what happens with a stimulus. And I think there are very real-world examples of what happens when states and cities have budget pressures related to a significant downturn in the economy, and how that affects their ability -- whether its police officers or teachers -- I think the difference between laying those off and keeping them on the job is the definition of a saved job.

I think that's one of the reasons why Governor Douglas was here, and Governor Douglas has a different perspective on a stimulus and a recovery plan than some people on Capitol Hill. He doesn't have the luxury of running up a $1.2 trillion debt every year, and going home. He is accountable for public safety and health care in a way unlike many people are. I think that's why he walked in here today and was happy to support the President's plan to ensure that we have a recovery plan that saves or creates 3 to 4 million jobs.

Q Can you look in the bill and see if any of our jobs are saved and can you just help us out? (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS: No, I'm --

Q I'm wondering whether we should come back tomorrow.

MR. GIBBS: I have some very bad news. (Laughter.)

Q Nothing could save our jobs. (Laughter.)

Q Robert, I wonder if the President thinks that all jobs are created equal, and by that I mean -- (laughter) -- you talked a lot about public sector jobs -- police officers, teachers -- if, at the end of the day, a lot of public sector jobs are created on the public payroll, as opposed to private sector jobs, is that okay?

MR. GIBBS: First of all, I believe that if -- the latest statistics based on the economic reports show that 90 percent of these jobs are private-sector jobs. No doubt there are public sector jobs, whether it's police officers or teachers, that are important to our long-term economic growth, that actions that we take or don't take will have a negative impact on whether or not those jobs continue. But obviously, and you saw last week with the CEOs that met with the President, that -- or small business owners -- those are the jobs that are going to fuel an economic recovery, not public sector jobs.

And that's why the President believes, as the CEOs said, as small business owners across this country have said, we need to get a series of things in place -- not just a recovery plan. Again, I think many business owners would and have talked to the President about a stability package that ensures that lending and credit are available to meet payrolls and to expand those businesses. The President visited the wind turbine business in Ohio, I think as an example. Certainly the new energy jobs of the future are just one fairly poignant example of jobs that would be created throughout the public -- I'm sorry, throughout the private sector in order to ensure immediate as well as sustained job growth.

Yes, sir.

Q Thank you, Robert. One of the things when you talk about that 7/100s of a percent in the package -- that figure is right, isn't it?

MR. GIBBS: If my math is right, yes. Shaky at best, but I did it twice on my computer calculator.

Q Okay. Would that mean that some of the more controversial items as far as Republicans, such as the $50 million for the National Endowment for the Arts, would be on the table then for discussion?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think -- you know, I don't want to prejudge what is or isn't on the table for the President to discuss with either leaders of the Democrat Party, as he will later today, or also with leaders of the Republican Party in any dealings that he may have with them. My point on this is just that we can focus on a very narrow definition of what this proposal does to help the economy, or we can focus on the vast majority of what this legislation and proposal does to get the economy moving again.

Q The other thing was that in his first interview as Republican National Chairman, Mr. Michael Steele said that one should also consider in a stimulus package suspending or abolishing outright the capital gains tax for two years to free up the private sector. Is that something that's ever been discussed in any of the meetings on the stimulus package?

MR. GIBBS: Not that I know of. I think you've seen -- I think we know where business investment is right now, and I think you know where the capital gains tax rate is now as it -- relating to where it was several years ago. And I would I guess posit that the economy isn't altogether markedly more healthy.

Margaret. Go ahead, choose amongst yourselves.

Q The Republican Senate Leader, Mitch McConnell, said earlier today talking about President Obama and the stimulus plan, I think I know where he wants it to go. He said, it appears the Democratic leadership has not gotten the memo -- or the message if you will. I hope he is going to be able to put the Democratic leaders of the House and the Senate in line.

And I guess I was just wondering, walking up to today's meeting, is he planning on putting them in line when they get together?

MR. GIBBS: It depends on if he gets the memo.

Q Does Mitch McConnell have it right, or not exactly?

MR. GIBBS: No, I think -- again I would, as I've said here, I think what Senator McConnell should do is look at the whole bill. I think what Senator McConnell and others should do is talk to their constituents about what's needed to get the economy moving again. Many of them will tell you it's a blend of spending that will create jobs immediately, spending that will ensure investments for long-term economic growth, as well as some mix of tax cuts to put money back in the pockets of middle-class families and small business owners, and that a correct blend of that will get the economy moving again.

And I think that's exactly the proposal that the President and his team put together, and exactly the proposal that we've seen pass the House of Representatives thus far. And we're encouraged -- this week it will be debated on in the Senate, and we'll move forward from there.

Q So just quickly, you don't think that Mitch McConnell and the Republican leadership team is closer to what the President would like to see than the Democrats obviously are?

MR. GIBBS: Well, if I read most of the comments -- I mean, Senator McConnell believed that -- if I've read the AP story correctly, he didn't think the piece of legislation would pass the Senate. I think the President believes it will not only pass the Senate, but the Senate proposal is a good plan. I think his members want infrastructure spending, and this bill contains $123 billion in infrastructure spending. His members want tax cuts, and the bill contains more than a third of the money involved is in tax cuts. I think that the proposal that we have is a strong one, and it will create the jobs necessary to get Americans back to work.

April.

Q Two questions. One, there's a group of Democrats that desperately wants to meet with the President, members of the Congressional Black Caucus. Are they on the President's agenda? They want to talk to him about the stimulus package, issues of education, issues of unemployment benefit extensions, Pell grants, things that are in the stimulus package.

MR. GIBBS: I don't have the full list in front of me, the President's schedule. I am sure he'll meet with -- throughout the rest of this week and this month -- Democrats and Republicans on any number of those issues, including how to get more unemployment benefits out to the states, how to create jobs, and all the things that you speak about.

Q And also one more question.

MR. GIBBS: Oh, I'm sorry.

Q Michael Steele, you guys didn't come out with a statement on Michael Steele. Why? What is -- has the President reached out to Michael Steele? He has made several comments about the President, to include: "How do you like me now?" He is the other African American now heading a major party in this country.

MR. GIBBS: I would direct him to somebody over at the DNC.

Michael.

Q You said that the President was pleased with the House bill as it was passed. It's a very different bill, though, than what the transition talked about in early January. Back then you were talking about $300 billion in tax cuts, 40 percent of the stimulus. According to CBO score on Friday, it was a $182 billion that passed, 22 percent of the stimulus. What does it say about Obama's influence with Congress if they end up passing something very different than what he asked for in January, and is the President still happy?

MR. GIBBS: I don't think what ultimately passed was markedly different than what the President proposed. The figures I saw today are different than what you mentioned in CBO. That's not surprising -- we've kind of a had a little bit of a running debate with some of the figures that have been birthed by the CBO.

But, again, the basis for the legislation that we have now, the basis for the proposal that the President and his economic team developed fundamentally contain what's necessary through spending and tax cuts -- what's necessary to get the economy moving to create long-term economic growth; to do so in a way that's accountable and transparent to the American taxpayers; that invests in infrastructure and creates jobs and things like the new energy economy; and cuts taxes.

I think all of those were the basis for the President's proposal. He likes what he's seen thus far in the House proposal. Again, the test is, what can we do to get the economy moving and get people back to work. And I think he believes that the House bill passes that test.

Q But that -- is the White House still thinking about that 40 percent figure? I mean, is that still something that you guys would like to --

MR. GIBBS: I would point you to Congress and the people that might be able to tell you what the legislative process is -- what is going to happen this week, again, as I said earlier, the proposal in the Senate has already been added to significantly with an increase in tax cuts and making it different than what's in the House. And we'll see -- hopefully sometime next week after this bill passes the Senate and we can begin to reconcile the House and the Senate proposal -- what the final outlines of a deal will be.

But I believe, and the President strongly believes, that the outlines of that deal will largely mirror the proposal that he sent up that creates jobs. And I think that members of Congress in both parties, if they take a clear-eyed look at this proposal, will understand that that test is met in this proposal and that it will help put America back to work.

Thanks, guys.

                  END                  2:35 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 2/3/09
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                  

February 3, 2009 


PRESS BRIEFING BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:42 P.M. EST
      MR. GIBBS:  Just a couple of quick housekeeping things and we'll do some questions.
      The President spoke -- has spoken today with three more Republican governors who I believe have signed a letter in support of the economic recovery plan that's winding its way through Congress.  He spoke with Governor Crist of Florida, Governor Schwarzenegger of California, and Governor Rell of Connecticut.  Again, they signed a letter, part of 19 governors that signed a letter in support of an economic recovery plan that they understand will help them make it through tough budget times so that they don't have to cut valuable services like health care and public safety; that will put people back to work and create more than 3 million jobs; as well as get our economy moving again.
      So he made those phone calls earlier today.  And with that, I'll take a few of your questions.  Yes, ma'am.
      Q    Thanks, Robert.  Why the about-face from here on Tom Daschle yesterday?  The President said he absolutely stood by him.  Today he accepts his withdrawal of his nomination.
      MR. GIBBS:  You know, let me step back and do a little bit broader answer.  We're at a critical junction -- juncture in our nation's history, at a crossroads economically.  And the President has a robust agenda to deal with many of those problems.
      As Senator Daschle said in the statement that we released, and told the President on the phone, that he did not want to be a distraction to that agenda.  Senator Daschle has served this country for almost three decades with distinction and I think America can be proud of that service.  The same is true for Ms. Killefer.
      I think they both recognized that you can't set an example of responsibility, but accept a different standard in who serves.  They both decided and recognized that their nominations would distract from the important goals and the critical agenda that the President put forward.
      Each joined in an effort to change this country -- in Senator Daschle's case, to help more Americans get affordable health care, to get our economy moving again, to institute some fiscal responsibility and some fiscal discipline.  The important work that the President does on those agenda items continues here today.  They realized that that agenda and the President's call for change was more important and did not want to be a distraction.
      Q    That doesn't say who decided that this was the best move.  And if I could just follow up quickly.  Are there other nominees out there with tax problems that we don't know about?
      MR. GIBBS:  The President is quite confident in the people that serve in this White House and serve in this administration; that we've put a standard of ethics and accountability that's unseen and unmatched by any previous administration in our country's history.
      Again, Senator Daschle -- as it relates to your first question, Senator Daschle decided to remove his name from consideration and remove his nomination for Secretary of Health and Human Services.
      Q    What about --
      Q    Robert, a question --
      MR. GIBBS:  I'm sorry --
      Q    Are there other nominees with tax problems?
      MR. GIBBS:  The President is confident in the people he's chosen to serve in government.
      Q    Question on two issues.  First, to follow up on Daschle.  What does the -- or what is your time frame for announcing a new Secretary?  And will this withdrawal affect any of the appointments to other health-related areas, like the FDA and the Surgeon General?
      MR. GIBBS:  We're working on nominees for both of those positions.  Obviously families all over the country have -- understand the importance of getting somebody at the Food and Drug Administration who will set forth a regulatory structure  that protects American families, whether it's the medicine that they take or the food that they eat.  We've all been reminded of that more so than ever, just in the past few weeks as it relates to the contamination of peanuts that are affecting millions of people.  And I thought about it the other day when I was making a sandwich for my son.
      In terms of, you know, nominees for each of these positions, obviously the administration is looking for replacements as we speak.
      Q    I want to flesh out another issue, just while I've still got your attention.  On Iran today, the satellite launch from Iran, how does that affect President Obama's attitude about reaching out towards that country?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, obviously the White House has seen reports on Iran.  Efforts to develop missile delivery capability, efforts that continue on an illicit nuclear program, or threats that Iran makes toward Israel, and its sponsorship of terror are of acute concern to this administration.  The President is clear that he wants Iran to be a responsible member of the world community.  Again, I would underscore the "responsible," that with that goes responsibilities.  The actions -- this action does not convince us that Iran is acting responsibly to advance stability or security in the region.
      All of this continues to underscore that our administration will use all elements of our national power to deal with Iran and to help it be a responsible member of the international community.
      Q    Robert, back on Daschle, you said a moment ago that both Daschle and Killefer realized there was a new standard of responsibility.  How do you explain, then, sticking with Tim Geithner, who had some $34,000 in back taxes and standing behind him for Treasury Secretary -- because Ms. Killefer had much less money in taxes that she owed.
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, Mr. Geithner has gone through a process, Ed, that -- he's gone through finance committee, he's gone through the full Senate with bipartisan support and serves --
      Q    Serves in principle -- not just process, but shouldn't principle guide it or --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, the process has guided Mr. Geithner to be the Secretary of Treasury of the United States of America, a position that he was approved for by the Senate with bipartisan support and serves in today.
      Q    What happened to the -- there was sort of -- everyone was holding it up, especially in the media, as a vaunted vetting process.  It seems to have hit some bumps.  How do you explain what happened to the vetting process?  And are you making changes to it because of what's happened, and asking people more questions about taxes, for example?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, the President has confidence in the system.  The President has confidence in the nominees that serve his administration.  We're always looking for members and people that want to serve to advance an agenda that provides more affordable health care, that gets our economy moving again.  Obviously, as it relates to the positions that withdrew their nominations today, we look for good people with records of distinction that can serve in those --
      Q    Then what happened to the vetting process?
      MR. GIBBS:  The President has confidence in the process.
      Q    Robert, two questions.  One, on the Daschle issue, you talk about an era of responsibility -- we talked about that yesterday.  Is there anybody at the White House taking responsibility for what has been a very messy confirmation process for Richardson, Geithner, Senator Daschle and Nancy Killefer?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, we all take responsibility and the President takes responsibility.
      Q    Okay.  And then a follow up question -- not a follow up question, a new question, which is, there are a lot of military experts who think that the recent incursions into Pakistan constitute a new and separate war that the President should address the nation on, and not just an aspect, a side war in Afghanistan.  Does the President view the new CIA attacks in Pakistan as a new war?
      MR. GIBBS:  I haven't seen those reports and I'm not going to comment from here on intelligence matters.  But I have not seen the reports that you refer to.
      Q    Is the White House at any level considering Leo Hindery as a possible Commerce Secretary throughout this process, as recommended by Tom Daschle?
      MR. GIBBS:  The President nominated a Commerce Secretary today, Senator Judd Gregg, who we believe will serve with distinction, shares the President's view on getting our economy moving again.
      I don't know -- I have no news on that or no information on that.  Again, the President has made a selection for that position today, announced that selection, and we look forward to his speedy confirmation.
      Q    Just a follow-up.  Do you believe that the Daschle situation has been compounded or confused or slowed by the fact that there are so many of his top advisors serving in President Obama's administration -- did that cloud any judgment here?
      MR. GIBBS:  No.
      Chip.
      Q    If there's a new standard of responsibility, and it's the President's standard, why wouldn't he have been the one to make the decision to say, this guy doesn't meet the standard of responsibility?  Does he wait for the nominee to say, I don't meet that standard?
      MR. GIBBS:  I'm not going to spend a lot of time up here today looking through the rearview mirror or playing Monday morning quarterback on all this.
      The President understands that each of these individuals has served this country with distinction, appreciates that service.  Each asked to withdraw their nomination and the President on each occasion accepted those withdrawals.
      Each also decided they couldn't distract from the agenda that the President was pursuing.  The agenda that he was pursuing is bigger than them, it's bigger than me, it's bigger than any of us that serve at the pleasure of the President of the United States.  That's the work that continues here at the White House; work that started many days ago and will continue both today and tomorrow.
      Chuck.
      Q    So if Senator Daschle hadn't withdrawn, the President would have stuck by his nomination?
      MR. GIBBS:  You know, I would love to play hypothetical games with you all day long, but --
      Q    Well, it's obviously --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, Chuck, I think you were distributed through fairly rudimentary means the decision of Senator Daschle to step back and that's where we are.
      Q    And on the meeting with congressional Democrats last night, there's a couple of news accounts that describe it as a terse meeting, or that it was a little bit of a -- not a rallying of the troops, but of, you got to get this done.  Are those fair descriptions of the meeting that the President --
      MR. GIBBS:  The meeting was not described to me as tense or -- I forget some of the adjectives used to describe it, or I've seen describe it.  The President's meeting with Democrats, both from the House and the Senate, was to talk about how to get the best bill quickly to his desk.  The deadline --
      Q    So he said it can't get over $900 billion and you're going to have to give up some of your --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I'm not going to get into a back-and-forth on that.  I think the President thought the meeting was productive, that they made progress toward the goal of having the strongest stimulus package possible.
      Q    (Inaudible.)
      MR. GIBBS:  They will put -- (laughter) -- I'll try to give you the best answers I can, Chuck, and you can -- we can ask questions.  Again, the President thought -- if I can, just, you know, thank you --
      Q    Please.
      MR. GIBBS:  Thank you.  We need lights like those debates.  (Laughter.)  At least wait for mine to turn yellow.  (Laughter.)
      The President thought the meeting was very productive.  The President thought the discussions that he had, the discussion he had with Government Douglas, the discussion he's had with Republican governors today, the discussion he's had with Democratic members of Congress -- he's going to see more this week -- all these discussions are working toward the strongest possible package to put people back to work.
      I do think -- again, I think people have lost sight of what the legislation does.  It creates -- we think it will save or create more than 3 million jobs and get our economy moving again.  And then if we fail to act or if this town fails to act, the recession will be far worse and far deeper than it is right now, and many in America are facing dire consequences.  Again, we'll get statistics later this week that demonstrate how many people lost their jobs in the previous month.  I think that will continue to underscore for people how important it is to get something to the President's desk as quickly as possible.
      Q    Robert, are you saying that no one at the White House whispered or conveyed the word to Senator Daschle that it might be time for him to withdraw?  That was totally his decision --
      MR. GIBBS:  I'm saying the decision --
      Q    -- and he was not pushed at all?
      MR. GIBBS:  I'm saying the decision was made by Senator Daschle.
      Q    Can you also say whether or not President Obama or anyone at the White House spoke with Governor Lynch of New Hampshire about nominating a Republican to replace Senator Gregg?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, when news reports surfaced of Senator Gregg's interest in, or that we were looking at him as a possibility for Secretary of Commerce -- did the Governor of New Hampshire call the White House and voice his support?  Yes.  Did this White House have anything to do with the selection of who might be picked to replace a standing senator if he were selected?  No.
      Q    I'm sorry, can I follow up real quick?  You didn't quite answer the question.  Was Daschle given any kind of signal, yes or no, from the White House that he should withdraw?
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't know how much more clear I can be.  The decision was Senator Daschle's.
      
      Q    No, no, no, no.  He could have decided after he got a signal.  Did he get a signal -- just say yes or no -- from the White House?  You can answer that question, yes or no.
      MR. GIBBS:  No, from the White House, he did not get a signal.
      Q    From anywhere else?  (Laughter.)  I just -- words are chosen --
      MR. GIBBS:  You know what I'm going to do from now on?  I'm going to have you guys write down your questions so I don't misinterpret --
      Q    Words are chosen very careful in this briefing room, as you know, that's why I'm --
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't know how much more clear I can be with the word "no."
      Laura, please phrase your question clearly and succinctly.  (Laughter.)
      Q    I'll do my best.
      MR. GIBBS:  Speak in slow monotone so that I can understand.  (Laughter.)  Go ahead.
      Q    I don't know about the slow monotone.  But Robert, the President and others have spoken of Senator Daschle's unique qualifications to lead the health reform effort.  Given his withdrawal, two questions.  One, what impact do you think that will have on the opportunity to get health care reform, which was a heavy lift to start with?  And secondly, was there or is there any consideration of keeping him on in the White House post, which does not require a confirmation?
      MR. GIBBS:  The President -- well, Senator Daschle has withdrawn his nomination and withdrawn from serving in the White House in the capacity that we had talked about earlier.
      As it relates to your first question on health care, I think Senator Daschle would be -- and I think he says it, in essence, in his statement -- that much like the agenda that the President has outlined on any number of subjects, the issue of affordable health care for every American is bigger than one person; and the job of ensuring health care reform will outlast any person nominated for the Secretary of HHS and likely anybody that serves in this administration.
      This a problem that confounds federal and state governments.  It confounds families and businesses large and small.  We watch each year as health care prices get higher and higher and higher, and more people slip through the cracks, more businesses are unable to afford to provide health care coverage for their employees.  We are hopeful to sign a bill this week that closes that gap for children by expanding the popular Children's Health Insurance Program.
      I don't think the effort slows down for health care reform, and I think Senator Daschle and others would admit that the effort is far bigger than any one individual.  It's so important, it encompasses so much of our economy, and we understand that the system that we currently have whereby Americans pay more for health care and get less from it than virtually any industrialized country on the planet underscores that this is bigger than any one group or any individual.
      Q    But given the fact that you now have to start all over trying to find someone to lead this effort --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, we have to --
      Q    -- to be HHS Secretary, you don't think that this is going to put things back?
      MR. GIBBS:  No, I -- no, because I think there are obviously many people in this administration that are working on this issue right now.  We're looking for a new nominee, but the problem has existed for quite some time and the work toward a solution to make health care more affordable won't stop or won't pause while we look for that nominee.
      Major.
      Q    Since you brought up the process with Secretary Geithner -- Max Baucus, the Chairman of the Finance Committee, has put out a statement saying he thinks that if allowed to stay, Tom Daschle would have been confirmed.  John Kerry put out a statement saying it was a mistake to withdraw his nomination.  Why would the White House believe it's a good idea to disappoint Democrats, who are their natural allies on health care, by preemptively taking away someone they believed could have been confirmed, as Mr. Geithner was -- despite his tax problems -- and they believe would have been someone that --
      MR. GIBBS:  Major, I wouldn't -- I think I'd address those questions to Senator Daschle, who, taking all of my answers into account on these subjects, made a decision to withdraw today, a decision that the President accepted.
      Q    But it's the President's health care reform agenda, not Senator Daschle's, and --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well --
      
      Q    -- the natural allies of yours appear to be, A, believing he could have been confirmed, and disappointed that this was done, in their view, prematurely.  What is your explanation to them?
      MR. GIBBS:  My explanation to them is if you want to know the decision-making process of Senator Daschle, that's the best person to address that question to.
      Q    How seriously would the White House consider Howard Dean for the Health and Human Services Secretary?
      MR. GIBBS:  I've given -- been given many opportunities to play the name game and I don't want to spin the wheel and start today.
      Q    So assuming that Daschle stays in the private sector, will he be able to lobby the administration on health care?  And will he be in any way involved in health care?
      MR. GIBBS:  I assume that Senator Daschle's passion for health care isn't diminished by today's announcement.  But Ann, as you know, Senator Daschle has not been and is not a registered federal lobbyist; therefore, based on the rules that the government -- stringent rules that the government sets out, he can't lobby the federal government.
      Peter.
      Q    Robert, if loopholes and exceptions are built in for various appointees who have lobbied in the past, and if key appointees are shown to have had problems in terms of not having paid back-taxes, is there a risk that this administration, in its ethics practices, begins to look like every other that preceded it?
      MR. GIBBS:  No.  I think if -- I'll be happy to provide you the names of the people that have already said that this administration has laid forward, in executive orders, the strongest ethics and accountability rules of any administration in the history of this country.
      Q    But Robert, didn't he say that before the exemptions and loopholes were --
      MR. GIBBS:  No.  No, in fact, the very same people that said that applauded the fact that you are going to have a few exemptions to allow people that are uniquely qualified to serve their country.  I'll be happy to provide you the quotes from Norm Ornstein and Thomas Mann that both address the fact that we've -- the bar that we've set is higher than any administration in the country's history has ever set, and their quotes for  understanding --
      Q    Would you acknowledge difference of opinion among government watchdog groups on this particular question of loopholes and exemptions?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, you know, I have read the quotes of government watchdog groups much like you have for many years, and I think those two are --
      Q    More now than the others.
      MR. GIBBS:  No, I'm not saying -- golly, I don't -- we should play the Jeopardy version of this.  You guys will give -- (laughter.)  No, I think -- I would hazard to guess that your network has shown either or both of those as experts on congressional reform.  I'm simply holding them to the very same fair and balanced standard that many in your network have.
      Q    Robert --
      Q    You've had -- you've had a couple of setbacks --
      MR. GIBBS:  I'm sorry, let me --
      Q    You've had a couple of setbacks today.  Does this have any impact on the President's broader agenda, starting with the economic stimulus --
      MR. GIBBS:  No --
      Q    -- which you want to have some Republicans onboard?
      
      MR. GIBBS:  No.  In fact, he's worked today on that.  That's what his focus is.
      Q    How do you mean?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, he's -- he's had conversations with Republican governors to build support for an economic recovery plan.  We're not losing sight of what's important on the President's agenda to get moving forward.  The President will make a stop fairly shortly at a local school and talk about the valuable investments that are contained in -- that are contained in the recovery plan that make long-term investments in 21st century classrooms, in ensuring the very best schools for our children and ensuring that those schools are led by the very best teachers and principals that our children can get.  All of those are long-term investments that will leave a lasting footprint for long-term economic growth.  So the work on this continues.  It hasn't stopped.
      Jonathan.
      Q    Yes, sir.  Were there conversations, aside from that, of Governor Lynch calling the White House to talk about the appointment?  Were there conversations after that at all between this White House and --
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't understand your question.
      Q    Were there conversations between this White House and Governor Lynch, aside from his first phone call that you mentioned earlier, calling to talk about the appointment?
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't have a list of every time a governor has called the White House.  Again --
      Q    But about the seat, though, I mean.
      
      MR. GIBBS:  About the?
      Q    The seat, the Senate seat.
      MR. GIBBS:  The seat.
      Q    Is that the only conversation had between this White House and Governor Lynch?
      MR. GIBBS:  The White House -- let me just be clear, so as not to be misunderstood.  This White House is not involved with picking who will be the next senator or who would be the next senator if somebody were to be selected to be the Commerce Secretary.  That is --
      Q    But Robert, the issue isn't who it is, but what party they are in -- the issue isn't the name, it's what party they came from.
      MR. GIBBS:  We weren't involved in picking which party they were.
      Q    Aside from -- you said today Governor Lynch first calling the White House to talk about the matter.  After that, there was no communication between this White House and Governor Lynch about the seat.
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't know of any more calls than what I -- what I talked about.  Again, Jonathan, I want to be clear that the person that -- the sole responsibility and the sole person for selecting the next U.S. senator from the state of New Hampshire is the governor.
      Q    But Senator Gregg said he wasn't going to take the job if it was going to change the balance of power.
      MR. GIBBS:  I would -- I would -- there may have been conversations between senators and governors from the state of New Hampshire, and I would direct those questions to --
      Q    Well, what does that say --
      Q    His contact --
      Q    Robert, back on the situation with Daschle, what is the breakdown in the vetting process as it relates to not getting the information from these appointments on tax issues and other issues that are coming up?
      MR. GIBBS:  April, I appreciate the opportunity.  I'm not going to spend a lot of time looking in the rearview mirror.
      Q    There is a break -- I mean, but it's an embarrassment to this administration.  Do you acknowledge that there is a breakdown in the vetting process?
      MR. GIBBS:  The President is confident in the process, and is confident in who serves this administration.
      Q    And another question on Ghadafi.  How is the President going to handle Africa and the issues out of Africa -- antiterrorism issues, issues about oil -- as you have Ghadafi now as the head of the African Union?
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't have anything specific on Ghadafi.  Obviously the President and many on his national security team understand the importance of the continent of Africa and the role that it plays in our security.  And I'd leave it at that.
      David.
      Q    Thanks, Robert.  You like to say, let's take a step back.  Can I ask you to take a step back?  (Laughter.)  On the campaign trail -- I can do that, too -- the President often talked of changing the ways of Washington.  We look at some appointments that have failed or had some bumps:  Tom Daschle, he wasn't a lobbyist, but he made a lot of money giving strategic advice to lobbyists; George Mitchell more or less did the same thing; Mark Patterson, chief of staff to Timothy Geithner, lobbied for eight years for Goldman Sachs and a host of issues; and you have the number-two man at the Defense Department, too, having been a lobbyist.
      Is it more difficult than you or the President imagined to actually change the ways of Washington?  Are you somewhat hindered by relying on this -- some of the same old players in Washington?
      MR. GIBBS:  I think the President would say to you that he didn't believe that we were going to change the way Washington has worked the past three decades in the first two weeks of this administration.  I think that's accurate to believe.  I would point you to, again, a set of ethics requirements that exceed any that have come before.  David, anybody that walks in and serves in this administration will -- can never walk out of it and lobby this administration.
      Is changing the way Washington works going to be more than a two-week job?  Yes, it is, and thankfully we've got four years to try.
      Q    Well, do you think we'll have -- will there be other questions on other nominees, or are you perhaps changing your perspective on some of this as you move along?
      MR. GIBBS:  Again, the President is quite confident in the staff that surrounds him and the staff throughout the executive branch.
      
      Q    On Afghanistan, Robert.  Did the -- just to be clear, in the history of what just happened, did the vetting teams just not know all the details or did they not appreciate --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I appreciate the opportunity to once again answer the question that has been asked here.  I'm not going to spend the day --
      Q    This is a valid question.
      Q    This isn't the --
      MR. GIBBS:  I understand.
      Q    Is there a way that you could still figure out a way to give us a little insight as to whether or not the vetting team did know and just didn't appreciate it --
      MR. GIBBS:  I'm -- again, I'm --
      Q    -- or did not know?
      MR. GIBBS:  I'm not going to spend the rest of the day looking --
      Q    But, Robert, a lack of vetting problem says that --
      Q    -- a large amount of paper and you've gone through all of the rigmarole of saying how you were going to vet, and then now there's a problem and you've acknowledged an embarrassment, and you don't want to talk about it.  This is happening now.  It's not a hypothetical situation.  It's something that we want to find out about.
      MR. GIBBS:  I understand.  The two names for the nominations have been withdrawn.  We're looking for new nominees for each of those positions.
      Q    But how is the process going forth?  That's what we're asking you, the breakdown on this.
      Q    If you won't talk about the breakdown, something else this administration has prided itself on is being able to take on a lot at once -- you know, walk and chew gum at the same time -- is there a sense in the White House that maybe things have moved too quickly; that it's not necessarily a matter of not knowing the facts about the nominees, but of not looking for nominees who can fit your new ethics and your new standards, and that maybe the process should be slowed down a little bit?
      MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't -- I think the problems that this country faces are many.  The work that we have to do to address those problems is obviously a lot, but it doesn't slow down.
      We've talked about it in here, the notion that -- and probably in a very short period of time we'll be working on a recovery plan, which we are currently doing.  We'll be working on some manner of financial stability that changes the way the money that had previously -- the ways the money had previously been spent to stabilize our financial system will be spent differently.  We'll be working on financial re-regulation.  We'll have news soon on executive compensation.
      I think that -- that's just on the economic issue.  I don't think that what's happened today or what would -- could happen tomorrow is going to slow down the many challenges that we face.
      Q    Can you also describe just quickly -- we haven't really gotten anything from you about the President's reaction to Daschle stepping down, to these number of bumps in the road.  Is he frustrated?  How does he feel about it?
      MR. GIBBS:  I know the President spoke with Senator Daschle.  He was in his private study when he talked over the phone.  But I have not talked to him since --
      Q    What time was that?
      Q    Was that today or yesterday?
      Q    Mr. Gibbs.
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't have the exact time.
      Q    Thank you, Robert.  There's growing concern among some quarters of the American society about this buildup in Afghanistan.  Has this very savvy administration considered taking an electronic poll, some sort of referendum of the American people to see if they support this buildup in Afghanistan?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, as I said yesterday, let's -- I know four weeks ago there was an announcement by an individual that didn't have the constitutional authority to order troops to a different part of the country -- or different part of the world -- that he'd made to send 30,000 troops.  Yesterday I was asked about a decision to send 15,000.  I don't know if that's 15,000 additional troops, 15,000 less.
      The President is undergoing a comprehensive review of our policy in Afghanistan.  The President has met with commanders on the ground and those in the region dealing with Afghanistan and Iraq.  Those comprehensive reviews were what he believed was important to evaluate the current direction of our policy and make some corrections as it goes forward under his administration.
      Obviously some initial decisions on that will need to happen soon.  The President certainly isn't going to make those decisions without being in touch with the units that might be involved or their families, and certainly without the coordination of Congress.
      So before we -- before we talk about the decisions that the President has made, I think it's important for the -- one, for the President to make those decisions, and two, for those decisions to be announced by the President.
      Q    May I follow?
      MR. GIBBS:  Sure.
      Q    The Bush administration made a terrible mistake -- they never went to the American people to ask:  Do you want a broader war in Iraq or do you want any war in Iraq?  Will the Obama administration make the same mistake?
      MR. GIBBS:  I think it is safe to say that when the President makes a decision relating to -- makes a decision related to our force structure in Afghanistan or our force structure in Iraq or the health of our forces in making either of those decisions, that the President believes it's in -- it's exceedingly important that he explain those decisions to the American people.  Again, yet another reason that I would counsel you to wait until the President has made those decisions before we get off and running.
      Margaret.
      Q    Do you believe that cutting these nominees loose will help restore the President's credibility on changing the culture in Washington?  And also quickly just to follow up on the earlier Daschle questions --
      MR. GIBBS:  Can I address your first question, because -- I appreciate the question, but -- the decisions that these nominees made were to withdraw.  So I think I'd --
      Q    (Inaudible.)
      Q    (Inaudible.)
      MR. GIBBS:  Hold on, hold on.  I think -- let me just -- I know people have questions and they bring in questions, but I hope that the information that I provide you throughout the briefing might change the phraseology or the tensing of some of those questions.
      Q    Whether they chose to remove themselves -- and I'm not trying to imply who began the momentum on the issue.  Could you --
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't know why I could have gotten such an implication.  Go ahead.  (Laughter.)
      Q    Do you believe that the decision by them and the acceptance by the administration to remove themselves from consideration will repair the President's credibility on the change message?  Or do you believe that there was no credibility problem, because of --
      MR. GIBBS:  I think the President -- as I said earlier, the President understands that changing the way Washington works is not a one, a two, or even a 15-day project; that it's something that encompasses work that he does and has to do each and every day as the President of the United States.
      
      The President has set the highest ethical standards for this administration and has spoken often of an ethic of responsibility that he expects all of us to meet.  That work -- he expects nothing less from anybody that would serve in this administration.
      Q    The President, as was referred to earlier, met with congressional leaders last night; he's giving interviews with the anchors today.  Is he worried about losing control of the message on this?  And is he concerned about the status and the posture of the legislation right now?
      MR. GIBBS:  No, I think the President believes that the efforts last week to pass this through the House was an important first step.  The President meets with members of Congress virtually every day, or talks to them on the phone; and we're happy to speak with a vibrant, working free press about the issues that surround an economic recovery plan.
      I think the President certainly is -- works hard every day to make sure that this administration and the Congress are working toward meeting the deadline the President has set to get action on his desk so that we can get help and relief to the American people.
      Q    So the President would be satisfied if something along the lines of the House bill went --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the basis for -- and the fundamentals in the House bill meet many of the tests that the President laid out -- and I enumerated them yesterday -- do you have a piece of -- do you have a proposal that, if he signed, would create more than 3 million jobs and put people back to work?  The President believes that's the case.  Do we have a proposal that does so in a way that's accountable and more transparent than any piece of legislation of that size or of even a smaller size?
      And he believes that the fact that we're going to put individual projects on a website meets that test.  Does the legislation meet the test of putting money into the pockets of middle-class and -- middle-class families that have watched their incomes dwindle over the past few years?  Yes, he believes it meets that test.  Are we going to make the critical investments that will help our long-term economic growth?  He does believe that it meets that test, as well.
      Q    Real quick, a housekeeping thing.  Would the replacement for Mr. Daschle at HHS, would that person, whoever it is, retain the health policy czar --
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't know the answer to that at the moment.  Once we have that person we'll --
      Q    What about the other nominees that have already been announced for health positions?  Are they going to still -- I mean, are their positions --
      MR. GIBBS:  There's no changes in those.  Stephen, I'll call on you, and then I'll --
      Q    Has the President made a decision yet on what position to take regarding the "Buy American" legislation language?
      
      MR. GIBBS:  No, the administration's review of those provisions continues, and I'll let you know when we have more on that.
      Q    Has he noticed the protests in Europe this morning about it?
      MR. GIBBS:  Say again?
      Q    Has he noticed the growing anger and anxiety in Europe about it?
      MR. GIBBS:  I did not -- I did not ask him if he'd noticed developments in Europe.
      Q    Thank you.
      MR. GIBBS:  Thank you, guys.
            
                        END                  2:21 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 2/4/09
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                  

February 4, 2009 


PRESS BRIEFING BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room

2:52 P.M. EST

MR. GIBBS: Good afternoon. Let me start by giving you guys just a quick readout from the President's meeting this morning with Secretary Clinton and with Senator Mitchell.

The President had a good meeting with Secretary Clinton and Senator Mitchell late this morning. Senator Mitchell gave an initial readout of his trip to the region, which included stops in Cairo, Jerusalem, Ramallah, Amman, Riyadh, Paris and London. He's now developing a specific set of next steps and the President looks forward to hearing more about that.

And as Senator Mitchell said yesterday, he remains convinced that patience and persistent American diplomacy can help advance the ball on these efforts. The President shares that view and looks forward to continuing to work closely with Secretary Clinton and Senator Mitchell.

And with that -- Ms. Loven.

Q Thank you. Two completely unrelated questions.

MR. GIBBS: I'm used to that. (Laughter.)

Q One on Judd Gregg. Apparently a former longtime aide of his is involved in the Abramoff scandal. I'm wondering if that came up in the vetting and how it was viewed here?

And then secondly, I wanted to -- I noticed in the President's remarks this morning that he talked about his election and it was kind of a subtle reference to the "I won" comment that we talked about, that came up in a private meeting he had. And the reports on the meeting the other night with the Democratic leadership sounded like he was a little bit tougher. Is he getting a little bit more aggressive in his rhetoric on the stimulus?

MR. GIBBS: Well, let me take your first question. I don't know about the vetting. I know that the Secretary-designate is not a target or a subject of any of the investigation about an employee that I think left his office in 2004. And I would direct you to them for additional statements on that.

Q But is this something that concerns you guys?

MR. GIBBS: I don't know if it was in that. I would -- again, I'd -- I think I would -- this obviously is somebody who has left his employment quite some time ago.

In terms of your second question, I think the President understands -- we've seen more statistics, more layoffs -- that our failure to act, our failure to take action that is bold enough to meet the challenges that our economy faces will simply result in far greater job loss for the American people.

Without a significant stimulus, over the next three years our administration estimates we could lose an additional 5 million jobs. Some economists as recently as a couple of weeks ago -- Mark Zandi, his estimate without a significant stimulus would result over the next three years in a loss, an additional loss of nearly 6.5 million jobs.

The President understands, and the American people expect us to take decisive and bold action to meet those challenges. Secondly, I think he said this in his remarks today, doing -- continuing the policies that got us where we are today aren't a recipe for getting us where we need to be tomorrow. 

Q It looks like he feels a need to ramp up the rhetoric a little bit. Why is that?

MR. GIBBS: I don't -- I think he understands that the challenges are great. The expectations by the American people, that we act in a way that helps the economy and puts people back to work, weigh on him -- and I assume others in this town -- greatly each and every day.

Our failure to do something in size and scope commensurate with the challenges that we have, we'll find ourselves worse off than where we are now. We have to take those bold steps. I think that, and the President believes, that we're closer in agreement than we probably are in disagreement. As I've said here, many of the complaints, some of the complaints have been about very narrow sections of this legislation. The President met today with, and continues to meet with, Democrats and Republicans here. I'm not entirely sure what that music is, but -- (laughter) -- we appreciate that, as well.

Q Hold music. (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS: We continue to reach out to find the necessary consensus to bring the two sides together. Again, that's our challenge based on the size and the scope of the problems that we have. But more importantly, that's what Americans expect us to do, to stop the meaningless back-and-forth, and instead get something for the American people that creates jobs, puts people back to work, puts money in their pockets, and creates lasting long-term economic growth for this country. To do anything less would be to fail the American people.

Jeff.

Q Robert, two questions on a related issue. First -- (laughter) -- in contrast.

MR. GIBBS: Extra -- you get extra for that. (Laughter.) 

Q First, on the executive pay announcement today, is there any concern in the administration that this might backfire, that banks or other companies that actually should be asking for money or need the money would avoid asking because they don't want to follow these rules? And the second question, the President mentioned that Secretary Geithner will be announcing details next week on further financial regulation. Can you give us a flavor for what we can expect, specifically --

MR. GIBBS: Nice job. (Laughter.)

Q I mean, can we -- thank you. Can we expect a done deal, or are there things that he will be negotiating with Congress on -- will there be numbers -- 

MR. GIBBS: Let me take the second one first. Again, I'm not going to get ahead of Secretary Geithner on this. Obviously we're going to outline a series of proposals and principles and ideas that no doubt will be -- we will continue to work with members of Congress about. I think you've heard me say any number of times what a lot of those principles will be.

One of those principles is what the President and the Secretary spoke about today, which was how do the American people feel confident in a financial system where they become -- through extraordinary assistance -- a lender to a bank in order to stay healthy in this financial system.

The President and the Secretary spoke about the need to ensure that confidence in the American people by ensuring that as these banks come hat in hand to the American taxpayers, that the American taxpayers are reasonably assured that executive compensation isn't excessive.

As the administration officials that briefed you all earlier said, obviously there are a few tiers to this program, and that the correct balance they believe was struck in ensuring that banks that need that extraordinary assistance will get that, we will not see catastrophic changes in our financial system -- but when they do that, that there's a responsibility that they have to ensure to the American taxpayers that they're not wasting their money or that it's not going to line the pockets of people or executives that might have gotten a bank to the point that it is now.

At the same time we want to ensure that access to greater capital ensures that banks that are more healthy can lend money to the American people and to small businesses, and that that not be overly punitive. The policy I think stuck that right balance, and we believe will give the American people the confidence that they need in the financial system and as it relates to executive compensation.

We've all seen reports, we've all seen news stories, even in the last 24 hours, about banks that -- as they -- and the practices that they undergo.

Q But are you worried about backfiring? I guess that was the original --

MR. GIBBS: No, I think we've -- I think we've struck the right balance. I think the American people will have confidence. But I also think we've -- we've given banks the responsibility, but also underscored the ability for them to continue to do what they do and not be scared away. I think that was a balance that had to be struck. We don't want -- we don't want to -- we want to strike that right balance.

Q Robert, in some of the interviews last night, the President seemed to back off -- pardon me -- earlier commitments to "Buy American" provisions. Is he in favor of "Buy American" provisions in the stimulus, yes or no?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I mean, obviously, Ed, we've got laws on the books relating to "Buy America" -- and thinks that those provisions are important. But he also -- as he said in these interviews -- wants to ensure that -- make sure that we're -- that any legislation that passes is consistent with trade agreements and doesn't signal a change in our overall stance on trade in these economic times.

Q Well, you were just talking before about how these times are so important; these leaders need to step up, so the American people are listening. Where is the President on this? What balance does he want to strike, then? What does the President want?

MR. GIBBS: The balance he wants to strike is to continue to get our economy going by -- without -- without unnecessarily starting something with trading partners all over the world and global partners that will hinder getting our economy moving again. The President believes we can strike that balance in this legislation.

You've heard the President speak any number of times about we have to be coordinated in the strategies that we undergo, whether it's recovery or stability or regulation, not just here, but throughout the world, in order to meet those collective global challenges. Obviously the President has heard concerns, but believes that a balance can be struck that ensures the laws of our country are upheld, but we can also do that in a way that's consistent with the WTO and trade agreements.

Q I still don't know where you are, then. Does that mean he wants a "Buy American" provision in this bill or not?

MR. GIBBS: Again, I think a provision can be struck that --

Q And the current one does not strike that?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I'm not a trade lawyer. But I think that whatever bill passes the Senate and is ultimately conferenced and signed by the President will strike a balance that ensures that we meet our commitments in global trade agreements.

Jake.

Q Robert, two questions, one on the stimulus and one on the executive compensation rules. On stimulus, Democratic Congressman Jim Cooper said that the White House wants to keep the Speaker happy and the traditional Democratic leaders, but they've let them know privately they're not interested in all the pork. Have you guys let --

MR. GIBBS: Repeat that question one more time.

Q The whole thing?

MR. GIBBS: Yes.

Q Okay. Democratic Congressman Jim Cooper of Tennessee recently said that the White House wants to keep the Speaker happy and the traditional Democratic leaders, but they've let them know privately -- the White House has let the Democrats in the House know privately they're not interested in all the pork. Has the White House conveyed to the Democratic leaders in Congress that you're not interested in all the pork? And then I have a follow-up.

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the President continues to meet with members of both parties to try to get the very strongest bill possible. I think he said yesterday in his interviews that no doubt that this legislation will undergo changes in order to get the strongest bill possible.

I'm not going to get into private conversations, every private conversation the President has. But suffice to say he wants a bill that will get the economy moving again and get the strongest bill possible.

Q Okay. And about the executive compensation rules, the Merrill Lynch bonuses, the Citigroup jet, the Wells Fargo retreat -- these rules would not prevent any of those from happening.

MR. GIBBS: I think that -- I will get ultimate clarification on this from Treasury officials, but there are provisions in the rules that ensure that some of the items that you mentioned are disclosed or are transparent. And I think in each one of the instances -- you mentioned jets, you mentioned --

Q The retreat, the Wells Fargo retreat, the Merrill Lynch bonuses.

MR. GIBBS: Right.

Q The point is you're saying that transparency will --

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think as it -- I have to check on the Merrill Lynch bonuses, but Citigroup's jet or planned jet purchase and the Wells Fargo retreat at the Wynn, both didn't happen because of the diligent work of many in the reporting of these -- and the outcry that ensued.

You don't have to have a rule or a regulation to ensure that the American people know what to get mad at. You don't need a regulation to have that transparency and accountability put pressure on the actions of companies and executives that change their actions. That's why the President put forward and talked about today a provision that gives shareholders an active voice in the pay and the compensation structure of the companies with which they hold stock.

Twenty-four hours ago we were talking about this retreat at the Wynn for Wells Fargo. The reason we're not actively talking about that today is because that outcry -- without a regulation -- killed the retreat. That by doing -- by having that accountability and that transparency, by putting those expenditures up on a web site for the news media and for the American public to see I think will have a great impact on the behavior of many in business.

Chip.

Q Thank you, Robert. On the stimulus, do you agree -- and does the President agree -- that if a vote were held today, he would lose; he would not get the 60 votes he needs? And is he now in a position of trying to -- with these one-on-one meetings -- trying to eke out a 60 or 61 or 62 vote -- 

MR. GIBBS: No, I don't -- there's people hired here to count votes differently than -- a job description that's different than mine. And I don't know hypothetically what might happen at any given moment.

The President -- as he's done throughout this process and even before he was sworn in -- wants to hear from members about any idea or any concerns they have about what's in any specific package. But I think the thread of what you hear and see from the President is that we have to have a stimulus package and a recovery plan that meets the size and the scope of the challenges that this economy faces. To do less would result in continued far greater job loss than what we're experiencing now.

My hunch is on Friday we're going to get job statistics that show -- without prejudging the numbers that I don't know yet -- you're probably going to see numbers similar to what you saw in November and December. That would be a million and a half jobs in a quarter over a three-month period of time.

Our failure to act and stimulate this economy to create the jobs that are necessary, to lay down those long-term investments, and to provide people with the money they need to meet -- to pay their bills -- if we don't do that, then we're going to see month after month after month continued hurting and pain in the American people. We have to work and act now to ensure that doesn't happen.

Q What inning are we in now? (Laughter.) And what are the chances of extra innings? (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS: I actually practiced that answer a few days ago, and I forget what I came up with. I would say -- I want to say bottom of the fifth.

Q How many outs?

MR. GIBBS: Unclear yet if we -- if we're --

Q I didn't see them clean the infield, though --

Q Who's on the other team?

MR. GIBBS: The sausage race is the beginning of the next inning. So just stay tuned and we'll -- we'll get --

Q Starter pitcher, still?

MR. GIBBS: Absolutely. The starting pitcher is in there, and still throwing -- still throwing nice curve balls, and still got a lot of heat on the fastball. (Laughter.)

Chuck. He set me up for that. I didn't do that on my own. (Laughter.)

Q On executive compensation, most -- most -- you keep talking about accountability and transparency, and then you just brought up the examples of how the media seem to shame these folks in. And we heard this phrase, "name and shame" quite a bit today. That seems as if people that the President called "shameless" last week are being allowed to go on the honor system. I mean, what is the accountability? You said, accountability. What is the teeth? I mean, what happens if these people violate it? Do we yank the money back? Do we bankrupt the firms? Do we fire the executives? What is the "teeth" part of this executive compensation?

MR. GIBBS: Well, let me get -- I will get clarification from Treasury on that. But I don't -- I mean, first of all, the beginning and the end of these is not just putting something on a web site. There are real, discernible limits in executive compensation for CEOs and top management for banks that accept an extraordinary amount of assistance from the taxpayers. It caps their compensation. Any additional compensation would have to come in the form of restricted common stock that couldn't be cashed in unless or until the taxpayers are paid back with interest. That's a real deal.

Q If they violate it, I mean, that's what I mean -- 

MR. GIBBS: I'll check on whatever -- what the underpinnings of the policy are. But again, let's not minimize -- I don't want to minimize, also as you said correctly, the name and shame provisions in this.

Again, I go back to Jake's question -- the actions of CEOs coming from Detroit to testify about the help that they needed from the taxpayers in the auto industry, their behavior was changed not by some rule or regulation, but by the transparent viewing of their practices. The transparent viewing of the practices of businesses that are involved in receiving assistance from the federal government I think will have a tremendous impact, as it already has, in changing the behavior of individuals, the top management, in banks in general.

Q Do you feel like there's the -- I mean, because there's not going to be an additional regulatory aspect, it's the same regulators that are monitoring banks --

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think they said that they'd point you toward the regulators specifically on that. But again, the steps that we're taking will have real, discernible results. Allowing shareholders to have a say in the compensation of CEOs -- I think there's a reason that that has never gotten through both Houses in Washington before. I think people understand -- the rich and powerful understand that it's likely to have a meaningful effect on their compensation.

Q But then the retroactive -- there's a bipartisan Senate bill that is already -- supposedly making its way through the Senate that would make these rules retroactive to the first TARP. If that gets to the President's desk --

MR. GIBBS: I would -- I will check on that.

Q How would you compare the President's public tone on the economic stimulus -- the reference to the word "catastrophe," the reference to the elections -- with the private tone that he's using in his jawboning with the senators who have been coming down here?

MR. GIBBS: He doesn't say a lot to us or to others that he doesn't say publicly. I mean, there always has been a consistency in what he says. I think he has walked members through and senators through the price of that inaction; that in addition to the job -- additional job loss you'd see over a three-year period, that likely you'd see our economic output at a trillion dollars less in each of those three years than what our economy is capable of.

You know, we have talked about the size and the scope of economic stimulus packages, but a three trillion dollar gap over a three-year period and what is possible and what is -- what is possible and what will happen in our economy means millions of jobs lost. I think he's been very frank with everybody about the failure to act, the consequences that are involved and the expectations that the American people have related to the action that he expects Congress to take and give him something that he can sign.

Q How do you plan to deploy these unemployment numbers, the overall number and the state-by-state numbers between now and voting time?

MR. GIBBS: Well, you know, I trust that many people in this room Friday, at or around 8:32 a.m. will write stories based on the release of the numbers at 8:30 a.m.

Q I mean, do you plan to target districts, states --

MR. GIBBS: There's not a governor that comes to the White House, there's not a senator that comes to the White House that doesn't understand what's going on in their state.

I don't know if you all saw the interview that Charlie Crist gave to -- on TV yesterday. I mean, he understands -- he has an unemployment rate that exceeds the national number. And he has a difference between what -- no Republican has a different viewpoint than what you hear in this town about what's necessary to get this economy moving again; what's necessary to avoid laying off teachers and police officers and sacrificing education and public safety; cutting back on health care, and ensuring that the investment in a state like Florida leads to long-term economic growth.

I think he's -- he mentioned in the interview what the unemployment number was in Florida. I think everybody is aware. And if you look at -- if you look at unemployment numbers and see the change in those unemployment numbers over the course of a year, it's a pretty stunning thing. I was on my computer before I came out here -- I may have the numbers slightly off, but unemployment has risen in the last year in 363 of 369 metropolitan areas that are observed by the Bureau of Labor and Statistics -- 363 out of 369. If that was a base -- if that was a baseball metaphor, that player would likely be in the Hall of Fame.

Hans.

Q Just on executive compensation, is that $500,000 -- is that going to be indexed to inflation? And then --

MR. GIBBS: I saw that question asked during the background briefing, and we'll look into it.

Q Okay. And the second part we're just trying to clear up is that for the people in that exceptional -- exceptional category -- for the executives that come there, how many of them will be covered by the $500,000 limit? And who will decide how many executives? Is it more than five? Is it less than five?

MR. GIBBS: So I don't make a mistake, I'll get the answer to that. I don't remember if that's broadened or not to the top 20. But we'll -- I'll get those administration officials.

Q Okay, so it won't be -- okay, will be firm? It won't be an ad hoc kind of --

MR. GIBBS: I believe that's in the numbers. I just don't remember precisely what it is.

Major.

Q Thank you, Robert. One on the stimulus, and a follow-up on SCHIP after that, if permissible. You talked about the cost --

MR. GIBBS: Have I ever said no? (Laughter.)

Q I'll give it a go, we'll see where it leads -- (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS: Fair enough.

Q You talked about the cost of inaction. I'd like to ask you a question about the cost of action. The CBO has come out with an analysis of the job creating potential of the Senate bill. You might regard these numbers as the upside of that: 2.8 million to 8.2 million jobs over three years. The cost side, that depends on the multiplier effect that CBO uses on the stimulative effect of the bill. It also says the cost on a per job basis would range from $100,000 to $300,000 for a job created. How valid a metric --

MR. GIBBS: Is that also over a three-year period?

Q Yes.

MR. GIBBS: That's divided by a three-year period?

Q According to what I've been -- what I've read in the CBO report, yes.

MR. GIBBS: Okay.

Q So do you consider that a valid metric? And is that a worthwhile cost for the American people to evaluate as they look at the -- not only the cost of this bill, but in the context of the cost of inaction?

MR. GIBBS: I would go back and look through -- I have not seen that CBO report. And I've seen different people do different math to suit the rhetoric that they said either before or after using those figures. The legislation that is going through -- went through the House and is going through the Senate the President believes is the basis for creating more than 3 million jobs, more than 90 percent of which would be in the private sector.

I think obviously we have advocated, and previous administrations have advocated, for instance, using tax policy to spur job creation. So I think obviously that's -- without getting into the exact numbers, I think obviously using that to create jobs and to lay down the important long-term investments is critical.

But again, I'd go back to -- I don't know that the CBO estimates precisely the cost of inaction. I do know that one of their reports said that you would have a significant -- the economic downturn would be even more significant with the absence of a significant stimulus package. And that's what the President believes has to happen quickly to get the economy moving again.

Q And on SCHIP, the President will sign the bill turning it into law later this afternoon. The funding mechanism is the $0.68 per pack increase in the federal cigarette tax. Two different government surveys show that that disproportionately falls on those who make less than $75,000. Since you obviously believe it's important to have a stable funding mechanism for SCHIP, how concerned is the White House that in a recessionary time, those who make less money will not buy cigarettes, which may have positive healthful effects, but may undermine the funding mechanism for the very program you're trying to expand.

MR. GIBBS: I mean, obviously this is a program that we have -- that is expanding. It's not a new program, it's something that we've seen work. I think the genesis is as far back as the mid to late '90s, the balanced budget agreement from 1997. So obviously mechanisms that are in place, policymakers are understanding of the ups and downs of these things, and we believe have calculated accordingly.

The President looks forward to signing that legislation. You'll hear him speak about the importance of the individual Act today in expanding the coverage for children. You'll hear the President underscore the need that we have to make health care more affordable and the need to invest in that affordability to ensure our long-term economic growth.

Q No concern about the ability to continue to fund this program with a tax of this -- an increase of this size?

MR. GIBBS: I think bipartisan -- strong bipartisan majorities in the House and Senate have spoken to the importance of this legislation and the soundness of the proposal.

Anne.

Q The President talked yesterday in his interviews about not wanting there to be two standards for people, to understand there shouldn't be -- how then should people understand why it was okay for Timothy Geithner to go ahead in his job, but not Tom Daschle?

MR. GIBBS: Well, as I said yesterday, obviously Senator Daschle made a decision to withdraw his appointment. And as I said yesterday, Mr. Geithner has gone through a process in the Senate that included passage through committee and passage through the full Senate with bipartisan support and is now the Secretary of the Treasury. So I don't --

Q Is there not a double-standard there? I mean, isn't -- 

MR. GIBBS: No, again, I -- there's a lot of -- we can look a lot of rearview-mirroring in different decisions, but I think the President probably did what many people don't here in this town a lot, and that's take responsibility and set a very high standard for himself and for this administration.

Jeff.

Q Robert, as you know, the President -- he said several times in those interviews that he screwed up or he messed up. What exactly does he believe that he screwed up?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that -- taking, for example, the appointment for HHS, that obviously making health care more affordable is a, as you've heard him talk about a lot for many years, a very important issue to him. He worked on it in Springfield, he talked about it on the campaign trail, and hopes to make a significant impact on that important issue as the President of the United States. He found Senator Daschle, he believed, uniquely qualified to pursue health care reform that would meet many of the goals that he shared, despite making a mistake.

I think in the interest of getting those appointments, the President trumped the principles that he laid out in the campaign. And he took responsibility for that.

Q Going forward, has he outlined any new objectives or imperatives or ways for the advisors to find a replacement for this position? Will any of the fundamentals change in the job search basically for the new Health and Human Services Secretary?

MR. GIBBS: Again, I spoke yesterday that the President has confidence in the process. Obviously members of the team in this building and across the administration are undertaking the task of looking for a replacement.

Look, the President has set exceedingly high standards for himself and for this administration. You've heard me talk about from this podium the executive order that he outlined -- not my opinion, but the opinion of those that watch -- is a higher ethical standard than any group that's worked in this building in the history of this country.

I don't doubt that there are times that we might not live up to those lofty standards. And I can assume that when that happens, I'll come in here and you can get the sticks and I'll be the piñata. I think that's safe to say. But I will say this: The President believes that setting that standard and reaching high for that standard each and every day is far, far, far better than continuing the way this town has worked and continuing the politics as usual that we've seen for so long.

So he is going to -- he outlined those standards. He asks us every day to meet them. There are days that we won't. But to try to meet those every day far exceeds never trying at all.

Q Let me ask about the trip tomorrow, if I may, to Williamsburg. Presidents often say something at their first out-of-town presidential trip. President Clinton went to Detroit and did a town meeting. President Bush went to a military base. What is President Obama telling us about his priorities tomorrow?

MR. GIBBS: Well, Williamsburg has a lofty place in our country's history. I think what he is saying to, whether it's this trip to Williamsburg, or whether it's a trip to Capitol Hill to meet with Democrats or Republicans, that he's willing to go anywhere and talk to anybody in order to get a financial -- to get a recovery and reinvestment plan that moves this economy forward. That's his main priority right now.

I don't know that there's any great symbolism in this one, in particular, except that he's working tirelessly each and every day to get a consensus between the parties and to get something that will put the American people back to work, will meet the size and the scope and the challenges that we face, and live up to those expectations.

Q He's spending a lot of his time on this issue, talking to lawmakers. Is he planning to take it on the road, talk to average Americans outside of Washington?

MR. GIBBS: I don't -- I think he spoke to average Americans last night, sitting here. I think he'll continue to do that. I don't have a travel schedule for the next couple weeks. I know we'll go to Canada and we may take a trip before that. I don't think he -- the President doesn't believe you have to go any certain place to talk about a problem that faces each and every American, wherever they live and regardless of where he is.

Ann.

Q Is there still an Obama transition staff vetting of potential members of the administration, or is that White House Counsel's Office? And are they going back and looking again at anybody who might still be in the vetting process to see whether there are --

MR. GIBBS: I don't know the current confines of that process and whether it's housed -- where it's housed or whether it's in the Counsel's Office or not. As I said yesterday and today, the President has confidence in that process.

Q And so many of -- several of these individuals have had problems erupt after they've been nominated and after they've been seen by Capitol Hill. Is he still satisfied that each and every nominee that goes before the Senate for confirmation or walks into the White House as a new appointee has been adequately vetted?

MR. GIBBS: Well, obviously I won't speak to the myriad of qualified appointments that have been -- gone through the rigorous Senate confirmation process and spat out the other end, and placed hands on bibles and occupied jobs. I would refer you to any of the committee chairs with which that process has gone through.

Again, I would reiterate that the President sets a very high bar for anybody that works in this administration, works in this building, or works throughout it. I think he expects nothing less from us.

Peter.

Q Robert, given that the hardest work of this administration lies ahead in terms of energy and health care legislation, and the snags that we've seen with respect to the stimulus package, does the President need to retool or rework his legislative theme? Does he need to come up with a different legislative approach? I mean, are there any lessons learned --

MR. GIBBS: You guys are -- I just said it's the fifth inning, you guys want to change pitchers. (Laughter.)

As I said, the President didn't think that we were going to come in here and change everything about the way Washington worked in such a short period of time. You can rest assured that we understand that we've not yet marked off all of our to-do's.

But I think the process that the President is undertaking, whether it's stimulus recovery, financial stability, reregulation, energy, health care, any number of issues that are going to land on his plate -- that the process that he's used in reaching out to those, regardless of party, regardless of political philosophy, have served him well throughout his political career, and he means that in what he does right now.

Again, we found that the process has worked and is going forward. I don't -- Mark should be here, he'd tell me the exact day of this administration.

MR. BURTON: Sixteen.

MR. GIBBS: Is it 16? There you go. The amount that's already been done, particularly on a recovery plan, to get it to the process of being through the House and partly through the Senate in a 16-day period I think is something that's rather extraordinary.

No doubt much work remains. Some of the priorities that you mentioned, some of those long-term investments are contained within the recovery plan. And I think that the President will work -- continue to work on each of those over the course of the next four years. But I don't -- I would reject, I guess, overall the premise that somehow something is broken.

Q Robert, I just wanted to follow on Jeff's question, because the President said in one of his interviews last night that he intends to fix the mistake that he made, make sure it doesn't happen again. What does that mean? What is he going to fix?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think he's going to fix -- to build off of what I said to Jeff and others -- in taking responsibility and ensuring that what you may do in this town doesn't trump the principles that he talked about before he got here. The standards that he set out for ethics and accountability are ones that mean a lot to him, and that he'll continue to ensure each of us meets throughout this process. I think that's important to him and it's important to us.

Q Was it a bad political judgment, or was it just getting overeager to get somebody -- 

MR. GIBBS: I think I've laid out pretty rigorously what the President was thinking when he made those statements and what he meant.

Yes, sir.

Q Robert, the James A. Baker Institute is recommending that the Obama administration defer another lunar shot, and instead focus on energy and climate change. Does the White House have a reaction on that?

MR. GIBBS: I don't have anything particularly from -- I would point you to folks over at NASA. I don't have any particular guidance on that.

Q Robert, just to get back one more time to the question of what would be fixed, without belaboring it, but --

MR. GIBBS: Why would a third question belabor it? (Laughter.)

Q Is it a sort of "you know it when you see it" kind of issue with respect to whether there's a particular problem with a potential nominee? Or has the President given specific instructions to staff that there may not be any taxes that haven't been paid ever in someone's career? Or is there anything --

MR. GIBBS: I don't think the President has to enumerate what he expects of us. Many of us have been with the President for quite some time, and I think those that have only been with him for a short period of time can understand the standards that he set out for them and for us and for all of this administration. I don't -- the President doesn't need to write his staff a memo. We understand.

Q How did the staff come to understand it, though, when it was okay --

MR. GIBBS: Clairvoyance. (Laughter.)

Thanks, guys.

                   END 3:37                   P.M. EST
Press Briefing 2/5/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release 

February 5, 2009
PRESS BRIEFING
BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
2:11 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me -- before we start, the reason I was slightly delayed, I went to talk to the President about the news that Justice Ginsburg has had surgery for pancreatic cancer. He has -- he has not talked with the Justice, but his thoughts and prayers are with her and her family right now. And we hope for and wish her a speedy recovery right now.
With that, Ms. Loven.
Q Two things, Robert. Senator Collins said that President Obama told her he was interested in seeing the bill come down to $800 billion. Is that true? And was he meeting with a group of moderates today to try to hash some of this out?
MR. GIBBS: I don't -- I don't -- I have not seen the latter part of his schedule today, and I don't know -- I'll check on the $800 billion. I was not in the meeting.
Q Is that what he wants, though?
MR. GIBBS: I think he, as we've said, wants a package that will do what it needs to do to meet the scope and the size of these challenges. Obviously the package that -- we had some principles that laid out a broad range earlier in the process; the House passed a package I think in the low 8's. The Senate obviously has I think added $100 billion to that number through some amendments.
So -- and I think the President was clear today at the Department of Energy that we need a package that meets the size and the scope of those challenges.
And again, you know, we are reminded again why getting something like this is so important. New jobless claims came out today that showed those claims at the highest point since October of 1982, with 626,000 new applications for jobless claims. And I think we all expect that tomorrow's unemployment numbers are likely to show this country with the highest unemployment rate in 17 years.
So the President continues to watch what happens on Capitol Hill, and I think we're making progress toward getting a package that he thinks -- the ballpark and the fundamentals at least that he thinks will move our economy forward and create jobs.
Q Can you hit one other topic really quickly, if I could? Hilda Solis, the committee vote was postponed. There are apparently some concerns that she might have a conflict of interest as Labor Secretary. Can you talk about that?
MR. GIBBS: I believe she, in a question to the committee that the committee asked on follow-up about her participation I think on a board of some sort that was omitted from her original questionnaire, that she has answered that question and those questions are into the committee.
Q Is her nomination in trouble?
MR. GIBBS: I don't believe it is at all. No, I think -- and I think the committee -- the committee's statement that I think you've seen from Senator Enzi and Senator Kennedy denote that they will continue to work together to move this nomination forward as soon as possible.
Q Can I follow on that? Can we follow on Solis?
MR. GIBBS: I'll get to you, don't worry. Caren.
Q Can I ask a question about the stimulus? There seems to be a change in tone from the President about the stimulus. Definitely his tone today was more combative than the emphasis on bipartisanship that we saw last week. He talked about the worn-out policies of the Republicans, suggesting that they're the obstacles here. And I'm just wondering, has he given up on bipartisanship? Does he mainly only want enough Republican votes --
MR. GIBBS: No, I think he only -- obviously I think the way to get this thing done, the best way to do it is to do it with both parties. We have seen ideas debated and we've seen those ideas rejected by the Senate that would take out the full package and replace it with tax cuts, which I don't think are surprising would disproportionately cut taxes for those that have done quite well this year and over the past eight years.
I think what the President referred to is the notion that we tried those policies, right? We tried those policies in 2001. I don't think anybody would look back at the last few years and think that our economy grew nearly as much as it could or should have. And I think we've -- we've tried many of those ideas. We've tried cutting taxes for those that are doing the very best as a way of watching it trickle down and help everybody else. I think the policy hasn't worked and I think the idea, certainly in November, was rejected as a way of moving our economy forward.
So I think what the President has done is lay out throughout this process a plan that he believes will save or create 3 million jobs. We do have tax cuts in our plan and the tax cuts are targeted toward middle-class Americans that are in need of some help. The plan also has what many economists believe is the best way to stimulate the economy, and that is by spending money that will create jobs. I think that's the best way to do it.
Q Robert, last week your emphasis from the podium, and the President's emphasis, was that he wanted to listen to Republican ideas. Now he's going out today and criticizing their ideas and saying their ideas and saying their approach isn't going to work. Does he mainly hope to only get enough Republican votes to squeak this by in the Senate or does he want broad support --
MR. GIBBS: Let's understand that, you know, just yesterday he had Republicans here at the White House, talking to them. I think if he rejected bipartisanship, I think we could have freed up some time on his schedule yesterday. Obviously that's not the case. Obviously he's reaching out to -- and he's always said he would reach out to people that had good ideas, in a way that strengthens the package that we have as the process goes forward.
Q He's specifically reaching out to Republican moderates at this point, the Republican moderates who may be --
MR. GIBBS: He's reaching out to people that I think have demonstrated -- I saw some of Senator Collins's remarks on one of the cable channels earlier today, and she said she'd had a good conversation with the President. And the President had, in some ways, convinced her that we needed a package that met the size and the scope of our problems.
I think that's bipartisanship. I think a Democratic President talking to a Republican senator and getting some agreement on strengthening the package and moving it along in a size that denotes the scope of the challenges that Americans face economically, challenges that we're reminded of each and every day, the President believes that's the best approach for moving this package forward.
We're making good progress. I think the Senate is going to vote at some point soon and move this process even further along.
Ed.
Q Robert, what will the President's message to House Democrats be tonight? Will he be telling them that they need to cut spending in conference committee, since the bill had a lot of spending --
MR. GIBBS: Look, first of all, let's deal with a couple of these issues because, as I've said earlier, we've got a bill that was -- and I don't remember the exact number, $815 billion, $820 billion, $825 billion -- and we've now got it -- there's a Senate bill that now is in excess of $900 billion. The two biggest amendments that have been put forward thus far to increase the level of that spending was an amendment -- two amendments by Republicans.
So let's first understand sort of where we are in terms of spending. The President will, much as he did with the leadership here earlier in the week, first thank them for all the work that they've done, whether it's the fair pay bill that they passed and got to his desk; whether it's an expansion of children's health insurance that will cover children that currently lack health insurance; whether it's moving that stimulus package along. I think first to thank them for their work early in this session and early in this year on an agenda that's important for America's working families.
I have no doubt that they'll talk about ways to strengthen the bill and ways to move the process forward. Hopefully the Senate will soon vote on this proposal, and we'll be in a situation where we'll be reconciling different pieces of legislation, and hopefully meeting the President's important timetable in getting that bill to his desk, getting his signature on that bill, but, most importantly, moving the assistance that the American people deserve and expect -- moving that assistance forward quickly.
Q Yes, but earlier when the President talked about policies that have been tried and failed, he cited that he had been left with a trillion dollar deficit -- budget deficit.
MR. GIBBS: $1.2 trillion.
Q $1.2 trillion. So, even more. Thank you for that. And so now he wants to -- why then, if that's been a failure? Does he want to add $800 billion or $900 billion on top of that, plus the children's health insurance you just mentioned; tens of billions more? Is there any concern by the President about the cost of all this --
MR. GIBBS: Well, let's understand -- hold on. Let me just -- inherent in your question is understanding that the bill -- the children's health insurance bill was paid for, right?
Q Well, it's paid for, as we discussed yesterday, with a cigarette tax, and you're not sure whether or not that's going to --
MR. GIBBS: No, I wouldn't -- Major was not sure. I was sure. (Laughter.)
Q Well, you raised that question -- well, we don't know how many people are going buy a cigarette. I mean, that's --
MR. GIBBS: Right. But I'm just -- I just want to -- I'm not holding up with you, you're okay. (Laughter.) Right, you didn't realize we were shooting at each other around you. No, I just -- I just want to make sure that the phrasing of the question was -- there's -- the President did inherit a $1.2 trillion deficit. And I think you've heard him speak before of what is going to happen in our economy if we don't act. I said it earlier -- I said it yesterday that our estimation is, without a significant stimulus, more than 5 million jobs will be lost over the course of the next three years. Each of those years would represent roughly a trillion dollars in lost output -- what the economy would produce and what the economy could produce with a significant stimulus.
You could imagine what would happen to our deficit if 5 million more people are applying for unemployment claims -- the money that has to go along with that, the spending that would be involved in that -- as well as what would happen to tax receipts if economic output was, over the course of three years, $3 trillion less than what that economy could produce.
Our failure to act is going to worsen the deficit. The President has spoken in the short term, we're going to have to stimulate our economy with a robust reinvestment and recovery plan. The President has also spoken about, once that has gotten into place and has a chance to impact and affect our economy and put millions back to work, that the deficits that he inherited are unsustainable on the long term. And I think you'll see in a budget that he presents to Congress either later this month or sometime next month, you'll see that the President is involved in serious decisions to begin to get that deficit under control. There's no doubt that $1.2 trillion each and every year is unsustainable.
Q This thing on Hilda Solis -- USA Today is reporting that her husband had tax liens in the neighborhood of $6,400, I believe -- and that has been holding up the nomination. Is the White House aware of that? Is that true? When did the White House find this out?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I read the story in USA Today and it quotes somebody that worked here, so obviously we've -- we know about the story. I'll say this: We reviewed her tax returns and her tax returns are in order. The story denotes that her husband had some issues with paying a business tax, and obviously that taxes should be paid. He's -- she's not a partner in that business. So we're not going to penalize her for her husband's business mistakes. Obviously her husband I think has and should pay any taxes that he owes.
Jake.
Q Robert, two questions. One is a housekeeping one. In the name of the transparency that you and the President herald so much, is there any way we could get the copies of the waivers that the OMB issues to allow certain Cabinet posts or deputy posts --
MR. GIBBS: I'll check on it.
Q -- free of the ethics constraints you put up? And also the disclosure forms that your nominees put out that go to the Office of Government Ethics that somehow they're not able to email or put on the web -- is there any way we can get copies of those?
MR. GIBBS: I will check. I don't -- I don't know how those forms are distributed.
Q Just based on listening to the President's rhetoric, I'm sure it's something he'd want to do. (Laughter.) The question is --
MR. GIBBS: Knowing of your crystal clarity on his opinion, I'll certainly check.
Q He doesn't believe in transparency?
MR. GIBBS: Did you have another more pertinent question?
Q I think that's pretty -- I think it's fairly pertinent here, Cabinet nominees and whether or not they pay their taxes and whether or not they have speaking fees. With all sorts of industries they're supposed to regulate, I think it's fairly pertinent. You don't?
MR. GIBBS: Obviously I do, and obviously the President does.
Q Okay, well, then we'll move on. A majority of the American people apparently support blocking or making major changes to the stimulus bill, according to a Gallup poll. Are you worried at all that you've lost control of the process on how this bill is perceived?
MR. GIBBS: No.
Chuck.
Q Robert, you said just now, actually, in an answer to one of the questions, that the President said if he hears good ideas from Republicans he's all for it. Has there been a good idea from a Republican that he is now trumpeting in this stimulus package?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the President talked with Senator Snowe and Senator Collins yesterday.
Q Is there a specific, like, okay --
MR. GIBBS: I have not gotten --
Q -- that's a good idea, let's do it?
MR. GIBBS: I have not gotten from him that. I know that he believes that, and stated over the course of the negotiations, that there are things that he didn't -- while good policy, didn't believe should be in the bill. And I think he is watching what is going on in the Senate in order to see where the process moves this along.
Q Do you regret not -- you guys not being more forthcoming about what you're for and what you're against? I mean, it does seem as if you're allowing Capitol Hill to say --
MR. GIBBS: Well, Capitol Hill has a job, Chuck.
Q You're allowing Capitol Hill saying what you guys are for or against, and you guys haven't been the ones --
MR. GIBBS: No, I don't -- I don't think Capitol Hill speaks for what we're for and what we're against. You know, we traded gigs -- (laughter) -- we traded one for the other. But I don't -- he's not a senator, Chuck. He's not a member of the House. He's the President of the United States. I think people are pretty clear about the viewpoints that he has on what a stimulus plan has to have. There's going to be a back-and-forth on this stuff, and the President obviously is watching that in order to, at some point, get a bill that's on his desk quickly.
Q One housekeeping. You come out here and talk about different world leaders that he calls, and when you did Russia, you said it was -- he called the President. Has he spoken to Putin? And he does not consider -- by making the phone call to the President of Russia -- which, of course, I'm trying to not pronounce the name -- Medvedev --
MR. GIBBS: Medvedev, yes.
Q Does that mean that's who he believes is the leader of Russia, not Putin?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the President is Medvedev and the Prime Minister is Putin. I'm not aware that he's talked to the Prime Minister, but I know he has talked to President Medvedev.
Q Should we be reading into the fact that he made a phone call to the President and not the Prime Minister?
MR. GIBBS: I think the President is the President of the country. I mean, I think you should read into it that he spoke with the President.
Chip.
Q Thank you. Some of the moderate Republicans who are in these big meetings up there have said that they've told the President that they absolutely could not support a bill that's as high as the House -- $819 billion. It's now about $100 billion above that. He absolutely must have their votes, at least a few of them, to pass this thing. Has he agreed with them that he will keep it under the $819 billion?
MR. GIBBS: Well, again, going back to Chuck's question, we haven't voted on the $70 billion amendment on the AMT or the $16 billion or $18 billion amendment on the housing that Republicans offered in each of those occasions. I'll see where the President is in terms of the level. I think we tend to get focused on this number or that.
The President wants to -- obviously wants to move the process forward, but also wants to have a package that is -- meets the principles that he has in moving forward -- are we going to create jobs? Are we going to meet the size and the scope of those problems with something that's appropriate enough to save or create the more than 3 million jobs that he's talked about? Is the tax relief going to be focused on those who need it the most in the middle class? Is the spending that's involved also laying down important investments for the future?
I think all of those are the principles that the President has.
Q Some of those moderate Republicans have also said that there was just a fundamental mistake made in the beginning by giving an outline to the Hill and letting them fill in all the details, and that what should have been done is that you guys should have written a bill and sent it up there and said, make some changes but this is basically it.
MR. GIBBS: I have a feeling --
Q Has there been any discussion back there?
MR. GIBBS: I have a feeling it's a little bit like skeet shooting, no matter who throws the skeet. You know, it's -- you're going to get -- whether the plan comes from us and gets shot at or whether the outline comes from us -- I mean, it's -- look --
Q Has there been any second-guessing back there?
MR. GIBBS: No, not at all. No, I -- you know, it's referred to as sausage-making and probably for good reason.
Helen.
Q Does the President believe in separation of church and state?
MR. GIBBS: He does.
Q Then why does he keep this religious office open in the White House?
MR. GIBBS: Well, the -- the President signed an executive order today that establishes under his administration an Office of Faith and Neighborhood Partnerships. The President spoke throughout the campaign about what he believed was important -- an important role that faith-based institutions play in providing things like Head Start, child care. He made it clear in his remarks at the prayer breakfast and throughout the campaign that all of these programs should adhere to constitutional principles such as -- as church and state. The order establishes specifically in the job description of the executive director the ability to look into, specifically with the White House Counsel and the Department of Justice, any legal concerns that are out there regarding hiring practices.
Q Well, are they across the board equivalent to a program which is nationwide and so forth, has no religious context?
MR. GIBBS: I'm sorry, say that one more time.
Q Are they competitive with the government program?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I mean, again, I think in some cases you could go to -- you can go to a Head Start program that's run in the basement of a church. I think the President has long believed that the institutions of faith have a role in -- have a valuable role to play, but he also, as you asked me about, clearly believes in constitutional principles.
Jonathan.
Q A couple of questions. First, there's a lot of talk about having to get Republican votes to get to 60 in the Senate. Does the President believe he needs 60 votes, or is there the prospect that Republicans will actually let this go to an up or down vote because they don't want to look like they're blocking this thing?
Secondly, there's been some -- the President talked yesterday with some senators about holding a press conference on Monday, and possibly an Oval Office address on this. And I wonder if you could fill us in on those plans.
MR. GIBBS: I -- let me take a crack at your 60 first. You'd have to ask somebody on the Hill about the notion of what the number is and what the legislative procedure will be in order to move the process along.
I think the President would tell Democrat or Republican -- nobody wants to be seen as standing in the way of progress toward getting a package quickly to his desk and, more importantly, getting that package of assistance out to the American people. I don't think anybody wants to be seen as obstructing that process.
I do not know exactly where we are on the 24th for a joint address. But I do know that the President will have a news conference next Monday night at 8:00 p.m.
Q And the Oval Office address? There was some talk about that.
MR. GIBBS: There's not one on the calendar right now.
Mark.
Q Robert, I'd like to follow up on one of Caren's questions. Are you saying we're misreading the President's remarks today when we -- if we say he sounded more combative and increasingly impatient with the speed at which the stimulus plan is going through Congress?
MR. GIBBS: No, I wouldn't quibble -- I mean, I think when he said the time to talk is over, I think it's fair to read impatience into that -- at the same time as he says, obviously, the debate -- the debate over something the size and scope of this is important to have, but I think, Mark, he would tell you that the numbers that he sees and the briefings that he gets about the worsening economy demands action by Congress and the President, and that a failure to act will result in millions more jobs lost, far greater economic output.
I think the President did take on arguments today that -- about what type of approaches he and many other economists believe are best at stimulating this economy; that I think it is fair to say that economists believe, and the President believes, that simply doing more of what has gotten us to our current economic situation is not likely the recipe for getting us out.
Q And, Robert, there's another story today that the administration is trying to come up with a phrase other than "war on terrorism," to describe the conduct against extremism in the world. Is that accurate?
MR. GIBBS: I would refer you to the President's answer on I think it was the CNN interview, that -- where he addressed -- where he addressed this. We'll have -- I'll circulate that for you. What the President, I believe, said was he's used that phrase, but he'd also used different words and phrases in order to denote a reaching out to many moderate parts of the world that we believe can be important in a battle against extremists. I think you saw that in his initial interview with Al Arabiya before George Mitchell went on his trip overseas.
Q After meeting with Senators Snowe and Collins yesterday, what other moderate Republicans is the President reaching out to today? And does he plan to invite them here to the White House? And also --
MR. GIBBS: I don't have the latter part of his schedule for today in front of me. I don't -- so I don't know if there are specific meetings on this today.
Q Who has he reached out to?
MR. GIBBS: I don't know the answer to that today.
Q And how is he deploying Judd Gregg to help shore up support?
MR. GIBBS: I don't know the answer to that. I mean, again, I think he's -- I think he's reaching out to any number of people. I'll check and see if there are specific names that we have.
Yes, sir.
Q Robert, on a stimulus, there are about 17 senators working right now -- roughly divided Democrat/Republican -- to, in their words, "substantially change the composition of the stimulus bill." The Majority Leader just said a few moments ago "they have another thing coming if they think they're going to succeed." Who does the President believe is more productive in the process right now, this group of 17 or the Majority Leader who's essentially saying to them, don't go too far because we're going to pass the bill the President wants?
MR. GIBBS: Another good example of why we're not in the Senate and not involved in some of the individual debates.
Q Is the President therefore encouraging of the 17 who are working on something?
MR. GIBBS: Well, look, I think the President would encourage any good ideas, working with members and the leadership to get something moved forward. Obviously you've got to get -- there's a calculus of the number that have to move a project or a bill forward. The President looks forward to that process continuing, and thinks that it's important to get a vote in the Senate soon and get this thing moving. Obviously we've set a date for President's Day. And I think he believes that the process moves in that direction, and is doing so in a good way. I wouldn't -- I'm not going to get involved in different things based on reports I haven't altogether seen.
Q On the faith-based initiative, the previous administration believed organizations who had a faith-based focus could function best if they were free of certain federal anti-discrimination laws. This administration has a different point of view. Why do you believe these faith-based initiatives can succeed if they have to, let's say, for example, bring into their ranks employees that they're not as comfortable with, and under the previous administration, they were allowed some waivers and ability to --
MR. GIBBS: Well, again, as I said to Helen's question, the executive order that he signed, and in the job description of the executive director of the new office, provides a mechanism that didn't exist in order to look at all of the legal issues that are surrounding the hiring and the functionality of faith-based organizations as they help to deliver what the President believes is needed help. And I think the process that the President has put in place will allow us to evaluate all of those issues and meet the constitutional principles that the President holds in dear regard.
Q How concerned is the President about Kyrgyzstan and the base there and reports that it might be in the process of being closed?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the -- obviously we've seen the reports and I believe we've been in consultation with leaders there. Obviously Kyrgyzstan has provided an important -- an important air base in Manas that has been vital to our efforts and coalition efforts in Afghanistan. And we look forward to working with them to remedy that situation.
Jeff.
Q During the presidential campaign, Mr. Obama would travel to places like Ohio and Pennsylvania and other places selling his ideas and selling his message to the people from the ground up. Do you believe that -- or does he believe that his approach on this economic stimulus bill has been successful? And is it as effective doing an op-ed in The Washington Post as it is to sell some of these ideas from the ground?
MR. GIBBS: We could have picked any number of papers. (Laughter.) Kidding. I think the -- the President believes that the work that he's involved in right now is obviously very important. And a lot of this stuff is going on in Washington. I think the President has done interviews that reach all over the country. You've seen him -- he does events, obviously, that are covered all over the country. And we're confident that the message of this stimulus package is getting through, and that it's important. And people understand the importance of that process moving forward.
You know, I mean, obviously there's a million ways you can do this. But I think the President feels comfortable -- very comfortable with the process. And obviously, I think whether it's a news interview or a press conference, it gives him the ability to -- not just to talk to people here, but to talk to people all over the country.
Q I'd like to follow up on the faith-based thing. Is this his final word on this? Or will he be perhaps issuing a decision on the hiring practices overall? Or is it his intent to have the executive director of the office review these?
MR. GIBBS: The intent and the -- the order provides specifically for the executive director working with the counsel and seeking advice from the Department of Justice to get involved in hammering out those issues.
Q Isn't that handing off a controversial decision? Why shouldn't he make a decision on this?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think you can be reasonably assured, Jeff, that the decision that the White House makes will reflect the important principles that the President holds dear. I don't -- it's safe to say that we don't make a lot of decisions around here that the President disagrees with.
Q Robert, some Senate Democrats are expressing frustration that the reason why this particular stimulus package is losing popularity is because the Republicans have been very successful in focusing on these small parts of it that are easily caricatured and that have come to define this package, where the President is just kind of staying above the fray and talking about the need to pass a stimulus package. He said today he'd love to see additional improvements. Can you at least talk about the kinds of improvements he wants to see specifically? Or is that something he's just going to wait to do until it gets to conference?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think it's something we're going to wait and watch and see what the Senate does. I mean, it's a -- the bill is a moving target. The bill is different than it was last night; it was different than it was two nights ago. He continues to reach out.
You know, I do think we, in many ways, are -- and I've said this before -- that the number of -- the number of things that people seem to largely agree upon far outweigh what differences exist. There are I think still some that believe we may not need a stimulus plan, or that doing nothing is a credible option.
Q Do you really feel that -- that sounds like a straw man. I mean, that people -- you're not talking about the difference between no stimulus versus a stimulus, or 100 percent tax cuts versus -- you're talking about what is the correct mix and whether these specific things should be in it.
MR. GIBBS: Well, do I think that there -- do I think that there are some proposals that the President believes are -- won't meet the size and the scope of those challenges based on the size of those packages? Of course. I think you've seen that from members -- different members on -- in Capitol Hill. I don't think that's a straw man by any stretch of the imagination.
We have to move the process along and get a package and a proposal that addresses the need to create jobs, cut taxes for working families, and make critical investments in things like 21st century schools and a down payment on energy independence and affordable health care. And I think the President believes that the proposal that his economic team put together -- and in large part what passed out of the House -- meets that test. He hopes that the Senate passes something similar. And then we can come together and begin to decide the final outlines of that, but more importantly, get something to his desk and get it signed.
Every day that goes by without something that gives assistance to the America people is another day where unemployment benefits are applied for, jobs are lost, the ability for families to make decisions like buying a car or sending a child to college are dreams delayed. And the President spoke today I think quite eloquently about the fact that the time just to talk was over, that we needed to move forward on action.
Q Robert.
MR. GIBBS: Christina.
Q This morning when Vice President Biden spoke at the MARC station in Maryland, he said of the stimulus bill, it's not our moment right now. So given all these questions you're getting, when is it your moment and when will the President step in and say, it's so urgent, it's a dream deferred?
MR. GIBBS: Well, as I said earlier, I mean, I -- I'd underscore it even more for somebody who served in the Senate as long as Senator Biden did. Both traded gigs to come here. We're not members of the House or the Senate. That legislative process is going to have to work its way through. We understand that. I think the American people understand where the President stands on these issues and the need to move something quickly forward that addresses the big challenges that they face.
Look, this -- I've talked about it in here -- this is not something that's totally going to get solved today. It's not something that we got into yesterday. It's going to be a long process and I know we're going to evaluate it each and every day, but it's a process that will continue to move forward.
Ken.
Q The Senate is (inaudible) to allow tax deductions on sales tax and loan interest on new car purchases. Does the President support that?
MR. GIBBS: I don't -- I would have to check and see whether -- I think you're referring to the Mikulski amendment. I don't have the specific answer to that. Obviously we've seen earlier in the week the severe downturn in year-to-year car purchases affecting not just domestic auto producers but now foreign auto producers as well.
Q Would he like to see something in the bill specifically targeted at auto purchases?
MR. GIBBS: I think the President believes, without having a direct opinion on this amendment, that if we can get a bill that creates jobs and puts money back into people's pockets and turns the economy around, that that recovery and stimulus is likely to have an impact on the number of people that look to purchase automobiles each day. Obviously we'd like to get the economy back to where when you're reading the Detroit papers you're reading about the increases in sales in autos and not the big decreases.
Mimi.
Q Robert, Hilda Solis's husband yesterday paid back 15 liens, some of which dated back 16 years. And granted it's the nominee's --
MR. GIBBS: I don't think that's what your story says.
Q Is that not right?
MR. GIBBS: It's not the story that I read.
Q Well, regardless, it's not the nominee's -- I mean, it is the nominee's husband, granted, but did he pay back those liens at the direction of the White House, and does that in any way --
MR. GIBBS: I think he paid the liens back because he owed the taxes.
Q But he owed them for a long time and hadn't paid them back.
MR. GIBBS: Well, I -- and the White House believes that if you owe taxes that you should pay them. But at the same time, this obviously is a business that she's not a partner in, and we're not going to hold her responsible for --
Q Do you have any concern that this might add to any trouble she might have getting confirmed?
MR. GIBBS: No, I think, as I said, the committee released a statement that looks forward to working together to move this nomination forward even more.
April.
Q Robert, your Domestic Policy Advisor is saying that one of the first orders of business for the Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships Initiative is to go out and tout the President's stimulus package. Now, is there a line crossed with the issue of church and state as many of these committee members are church leaders? I mean, is there some kind of --
MR. GIBBS: I have not seen the report that you're referring to.
Q Well, no, it's not a report. She just said it just a little while ago -- one of the first things that they will be doing is --
MR. GIBBS: Okay, let me rephrase, I didn't see what she said and I guess I'd like to have a chance to talk to her about what she might have said.
Steve.
Q Robert, the President spoke this morning at the prayer breakfast about his own path to Christianity, how he discovered it, found it on the south side of Chicago. Does he still plan to join a church here in Washington, or what's the status of that?
MR. GIBBS: You know, I know that he has visited a couple of churches, obviously, around the inaugural, and I think there's -- he and Michelle would like to visit some more and figure out a congregation in the area that they can -- that they can worship in. I think the President spoke about his faith a lot in the campaign and I know he's -- I think he likely misses not having someplace regular to go to exercise that faith in church. Obviously, I think given the enormous problems that the country faces, it's quite safe to assume that prayer, even not in the confines of a church, is something that he practices regularly.
Q Can I follow on the breakfast -- thank you. He referred to Tony Blair as his good friend, Tony Blair. How close is the President with former Prime Minister Blair? Does he consult with him on a regular basis?
MR. GIBBS: I don't know the last time that they spoke. I know they've met several times when the President was overseas during the most recent campaign and also when the President traveled with Senator Lugar to -- overseas and back through London in 2005. I don't know if they've spoken most recently, but obviously Mr. Blair is somebody who has enormous experience in dealing with problems not just as the leader of a country, but now in his involvement in trying to get peace in the Middle East, like George Mitchell is working on and, like the President has said, that this administration will be engaged on each and every day.
Q Is there still a special relationship between the U.S. and England?
MR. GIBBS: Say that again?
Q Is there still a special relationship between the U.S. and Great Britain?
MR. GIBBS: Absolutely.
Q Robert, given the President spending so much time on the economy, how important to him is Vice President Biden's trip this week in terms of laying out the new foreign policy? And will the Vice President take advantage of some of the more conciliatory signs coming out of Moscow to have a meeting with the Russian delegation?
MR. GIBBS: I'll have a longer readout on the President -- sorry, the Vice President's trip to Munich tomorrow. I know he leaves I believe tomorrow for the security conference, and we'll get a little bit more information out on that tomorrow.
Q Thank you.
MR. GIBBS: Thanks, guys.
END 2:53 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 2/6/09
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                  

February 6, 2009


PRESS BRIEFING BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room

1:38 P.M. EST


MR. GIBBS: Good afternoon. How is everybody? 

Q Fine, great. How are you?

MR. GIBBS: Excellent, thank you. I'm good. Just let me get organized here for a second. Before I take some questions today, let me just briefly give you a rundown of the Vice President and the National Security Advisor's trip to the annual Munich security conference. The Vice President left this afternoon to travel to Germany, where he will represent the United States at the 45th Munich Conference on Security Policy. General Jim Jones, the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, will also attend the conference.

The Munich security conference is an annual gathering of governmental officials, foreign and defense policy experts, and journalists to discuss transatlantic security issues. Vice President Biden will deliver a message of support from the President for strong partnerships among allies to confront our common security and economic challenges. The President -- the Vice President will speak tomorrow and looks forward throughout the conference to listening to our allies.

And with that, Mr. Feller.

Q Thanks, Robert. I wanted to ask you a couple questions about the President's tone as he pushes for his economic plan. He said last night that the American people didn't vote for phony arguments and petty politics. And he warned about playing a game of nit-picking, and today warned about partisan posturing. Who specifically does he think is engaging in petty politics?

MR. GIBBS: Well, let me -- let me describe for you what the President is -- is thinking and what he's saying, which is -- I think you see an energized President fighting on behalf of 3.6 million Americans who have lost their jobs since this recession began in 2007. I think you've seen somebody who is warning of the consequences of not acting swiftly, not acting in the size and scope to meet the challenges that millions of Americans face. Any President facing the kind of economic crisis that we are had better be energized on behalf of the American people.

And let me -- I just want to go through for everybody a few of the numbers that we all saw this morning, if I can. In January, as you well know, the economy lost 598,000 jobs. With revisions from the past year, we lost 3 million jobs in this economy. We've lost, as I mentioned a second ago, since the beginning of this recession, which is dated to December of 2007, the economy has lost 3.6 million jobs. That is the biggest 13-month change in employment since 1939, which is the first year these statistics were started. In the last three months alone, this economy has lost almost half, almost 1.8 million of the 3.6 million jobs that have been lost over the 13-month course of this recession. And if you look at these statistics, the rate of acceleration denotes quite clearly that our economy is getting more sick, that the job market is getting worse, and it is accelerating quickly.

Let me give you a few numbers behind those numbers. As I said, the last month the economy lost 598,000 jobs. That is the equivalent of losing every job in the state of Maine. In the past two months, the economy lost 1.2 million jobs. That's basically losing every job in Pittsburgh or in Cleveland. In the past three months, the economy has lost 1.8 million jobs, as I said. That's the equivalent of losing every job in Connecticut or South Carolina. And in the past four months, the economy has lost 2.2 million jobs, which is basically losing every job in the state of Louisiana.

This President is energized on behalf of the millions of Americans that have lost their job or are facing getting that pink slip tomorrow or next week or next month.

Q I understand your point that he's energized, but what about this question of petty politics? How does that language help get a bill passed?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think it helps frame for the American people the argument that's being had in Washington right now -- a Washington that is reminded at least today of the sobering statistics that its government prepares to denote the pain that real Americans are feeling each and every day. I think we've seen arguments throughout the past few weeks and certainly the past week denoting maybe that we don't have to act as quickly as the President believes we should. Maybe we shouldn't take on the challenges that our economy presents and the unemployment that are facing millions of Americans. Maybe we can either go slow or do nothing. Or maybe we can go back to completely using the failed policies of a different era that largely landed us where we sit today. I think that's what the President is talking about, and I think he'll continue to talk about this weekend and next week. 

Yes, sir.

Q The President did make pretty clear his distress about the latest economic numbers. And now you've got U.S. automotive suppliers are saying that they need emergency funding to the tune of up to $25 billion to keep themselves out of bankruptcy. Can you confirm that the administration is talking with automakers and their suppliers to -- about giving them access to a U.S. Treasury rescue program?

MR. GIBBS: I would -- I will check with Treasury about any additional assistance. Obviously automakers are receiving some assistance approved by the previous administration. I talked yesterday about the desire, obviously, by this President to see an economy that's strong enough to get the automakers and the auto suppliers who are important in that chain back up on their feet and producing jobs. 

We look forward, obviously, to the automakers' presentation of their plans on February 17th about going forward in that manufacturing industry. No doubt one of the biggest hits in the unemployment figures announced today were those in manufacturing.

Q Does the deteriorating economic picture make it more likely that the administration will look favorably on the automakers?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the deteriorating economic picture underscores the President's desire to meet those challenges with a robust recovery and reinvestment plan that will create the jobs that we've lost -- save and create the jobs that we've lost and move our economy forward.

Yes, sir.

Q The President has talked about this sense of urgency. And so I'm wondering, in light of these new numbers, is there now a sense of desperation? Something more urgent?

MR. GIBBS: For millions of American people, no doubt.

Q But for the President? I mean, does he -- is this a desperate situation where he really has to get this done?

MR. GIBBS: I -- the President --

Q -- desperation.

MR. GIBBS: The President believes that we are facing dire consequences; that our failure to act will likely result in, as he has said numerous times this week, economic catastrophe. I've said from this podium that our failure to act is likely to see 5 million more jobs lost than without a stimulus; that without an economic recovery and reinvestment plan, the economy is likely to see, in each of the next three years, $3 trillion in total -- a trillion dollars each year -- deficit in what this economy is producing and what it could produce.

Many of these statistics, though, are not new to the American people. And I think there's absolutely no doubt that we must act quickly to get legislation moved forward in this process, to get a final piece of legislation to the President, so that the assistance that the American people need can quickly get out the door and start creating jobs and putting millions of people that have lost those jobs back to work.

Q Second question. Last week, after we had the -- or earlier this week, I guess -- time moves by so quickly -- in the old vetting process, you mentioned that the President was very happy with the vetting process. But we saw in The Washington Post this morning that Greg Craig would be heading that up -- apparently a change, I would guess. Has there been a change made in the vetting process?

MR. GIBBS: Not that I'm aware of.

Jake.

Q The President later today is going to be meeting with a bunch of families of terrorist victims. A lot of the people he's going to be meeting with take issue with his decision to stop the military commissions. They say that it's been through an extensive legal and legislative review, the Supreme Court has weighed in, and they don't understand what concerns the President has in this process. Could you explain what are some of the concerns the President has specifically about the military commissions?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the main concern that the President has is the military commission's failure to bring those in detention to swift justice. 

The President invited family members -- families of those that were killed in -- first in the USS Cole incident in 2000, and next in the September 11th, 2001, terrorist attacks, and wants to discuss his plan to bring about changes in Guantanamo that he believes will make this country safer and bring about the very same swift justice that they desire on behalf of those that they know that have been killed.

Q I'm sorry, how does delaying or even renewing the trials make it any swifter?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I -- the act that the Cole families are disappointed -- the act that the Cole families were affected by happened in 2000. We've not yet seen justice brought now in 2009 to Mr. al-Nashiri. Judge Crawford withdrew the charges without prejudice to reinstatement of those charges. Mr. al-Nashiri remains in detention. And her decision brings all cases into compliance with the executive order that the President issued.

But I think if you look at the number of those awaiting justice and those that have gone through the process, I think you'll see quite clearly that very few -- very few have been brought to justice.

The discussion that the President looks forward to having today is part of the ongoing process with how to move forward. I don't believe that the families affected by the terrorist incident with the USS Cole have -- have seen -- they certainly haven't seen this President; I don't believe they saw the last President, either. And the President thought it was important to listen to their very personal cares and their concerns about anything that's involved in this process.

Q The arraignment of al-Nashiri was supposed to be Monday. Because of the executive order, the President -- Crawford suspended the charges. I still don't understand, and -- how this is going to make the justice any swifter. I understand the cases that haven't been heard -- that's justice delayed.

MR. GIBBS: Without getting into some of the specific aspects of this case, I think the President believed that the best course of action going forward to bring about the justice that both he and the families seek in this case was to go through the very process that Judge Crawford has done in the executive order that the President has signed.

Chip.

Q Thank you. In days past, when we asked you whether he was going to take this effort to sell the stimulus on the road, you told us there weren't any plans to do that. Now it appears he is going to do that over the next week.

MR. GIBBS: You're ruining my -- you're previewing my week ahead. I spent all this time --

Q Oh, sorry about that. (Laughter.) But it now appears he is going to be hitting the road. And is that a change in strategy because there's a sense that you're kind of behind where you wanted to be at this point?

MR. GIBBS: No. Let's move quickly to a couple of things on the week ahead. (Laughter.) Without objection from Mr. Feller. 

I'll describe a couple of places that he'll travel to next week. On Monday, the President will travel to Elkhart, Indiana, and do a town-hall meeting about the American Recovery and Reinvestment Plan, before doing a press conference on Monday night from the White House. Elkhart, Indiana, has, over the course of the past year, watched its unemployment rate go from 4.7 percent to 15.3 percent. 

On Tuesday, the President will travel to Fort Myers, Florida, also for a town hall about the American Recovery and Reinvestment Plan, and return later that evening to Washington. Fort Myers, Florida's unemployment rate one year ago was 6 percent. Its unemployment rate, according to the latest statistics, is 10. And keep in mind that both of those unemployment rates are factored off of the previous month's unemployment rates. State and metropolitan areas aren't figured out until later than the national average. So I doubt that it is likely that in either Elkhart, Indiana, or in Fort Myers, Florida, the unemployment rate has gotten better for citizens either in those areas or in those states.

I think this is another chance for the President to talk directly to the American people about what he thinks is at stake. Watching millions lose their jobs, and having in front of Congress -- and hopefully in front of him soon -- a plan to save or create millions more jobs and get people back to work, putting money in people's pockets, getting help for state and local governments so they don't have to lay off firefighters or teachers or police officers. 

I think going directly to where the problems seem even more acute are important to the President, and important in his effort to convince Congress to move swiftly.

Q You've got the very -- I don't know if you'd agree with the characterization -- but campaign-style speech he gave last night; he's got the press conference; you've got Elkhart, Indiana; you've got Fort Myers, Florida. As one Democrat --

MR. GIBBS: Sounds like the good old days, doesn't it?

Q As one -- exactly. As one Democrat on the Hill described it to me, he's "pulling out all the stops." And that's not all it is. Is that a fair characterization? And is that because you're not where you want him to be on this?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I don't think we're where we want to be, because there is not a bill that has the President's signature affixed to it and assistance out the door to help Elkhart, Indiana, and Fort Myers and millions of other Americans that are affected by this. 

I think you'll see the President, as he's done even before he was sworn in, work tirelessly to move this process step by step forward until we get a plan that will put people back to work. The one number that he's concerned about in all this is: Can we create 3 or 4 million jobs -- save or create 3 or 4 million jobs and put people back to work? That's the number that he's focused on, as I'm sure that's the number that people in Elkhart, Fort Myers, and many other towns across America are focused in on each and every day.

Chuck.

Q Based on the speech last night and sort of by the tone over the last 24 hours, does the White House or the President sort of feel like they've allowed themselves -- you allowed yourself to get too bogged down in trying to win Republicans over and sort of forgot to just get the thing passed?

MR. GIBBS: No, I think by math or calculus, whichever you want to use, it's going to take Republicans to get something passed.

Q Do you believe it does?

MR. GIBBS: Well, if I believe that it takes 60 votes in the Senate, I --

Q I mean, if it doesn't --

MR. GIBBS: -- I would assume that --

Q If it doesn't take 60 in the Senate, then you don't need Republican support.

MR. GIBBS: Well, I don't -- you know, I -- look, I long ago tried to stop understanding the ways of Congress. And I know --

Q Join the club. (Laughter.) 

MR. GIBBS: Yes. I don't know the specific answer. I've been left with the impression that the Republicans would like to see the other side produce 60 votes, and that's what we're working on and preparing to do. And to do that, obviously, is going to require the help of like-minded Republicans who understand the consequences of inaction and what delay means.

Q You just used the phrased "like-minded Republicans." So you're interested in Republicans that agree with this stimulus package, not necessarily changing the package so much that it gets --

MR. GIBBS: I think it is safe to assume that we would like like-minded Republicans to support the legislation in order to move the process forward to help millions of Americans. Whether -- I don't -- I'll leave the names to you. We're happy to talk to any of them, and the President continues to reach out to anybody that wants to move this process forward.

Q Who are the town halls open to? Who are the audience going to be?

MR. GIBBS: The public.

Q You're not going to -- so, first come, first serve, or how is that --

MR. GIBBS: I don't know the tickets will be distributed, but we've never -- I've watched the President do town halls from 2004 through 2008, and the audience has never been hand-picked, and neither have the questions. And we're not going to start any of that on Monday.

Yes, sir.

Q Robert, I've lost track what inning we're in, but does the --

MR. GIBBS: We'll have more of that next week. (Laughter.) 

Q Does the President take any responsibility for the process not farther along than it is?

MR. GIBBS: Well, let's understand where the process is, without -- I will save the baseball metaphors for next week, even though it's Friday. 

We have a process that watched the President get sworn in on the 20th, watched a process that's gone through half of the legislative branch, and, I think with a little hard work, likely to make it through the other part of the executive -- I'm sorry, the legislative branch maybe as early as today, then we're working on ironing out some differences and getting something that both sides can equally agree on and get something to the President's desk.

Without telling you what inning it's in, I think the score is strong for the home team.

Q So he's happy with everything he's done up to now?

MR. GIBBS: Absolutely.

Major.

Q Robert, a couple -- 

MR. GIBBS: Of course.

Q -- no surprise to you.

MR. GIBBS: The only surprise was it is only a couple. (Laughter.) 

Q Flexible --

MR. GIBBS: I understand it's --

Q On the Senate floor just a few minutes ago, Senator Dianne Feinstein of California -- a state that's lost, as she said, a fair share of jobs in this bad economy -- said, "I reserve the right, at the end of the day, to vote against this package that I don't think puts those jobs out there." Getting back to the first question, who's playing petty politics? Is she, specifically, or anyone who's not yet sold on this package at the moment, playing petty politics or pushing old, tired arguments and ideas?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I don't know what her arguments are for coming to that. I know the President's argument for moving the process forward is a piece of legislation that will save or create those 3 to 4 million jobs that I talked about.

Q Is there an "us versus them" dynamic being played out here rhetorically for the President?

MR. GIBBS: I don't -- I don't think so. Again, the President is going to work each and every day energetically on behalf of the millions of Americans that have lost their jobs, the millions of Americans that are looking toward this town to work across party lines to get something done, to move that process forward, and to get the help that Americans both deserve and expect will happen. That's what the President is focused on.

We've touched on this many of the days that I've been out here, different speeches and different sayings and different amendments. The President looks forward to the Senate moving this process forward, and I think you'll see, at that point, that we'll be very close to a package that can meet the President's priorities and move this economy forward.

Q Question on Russia. The Deputy Prime Minister said today that Russia would not install anti-ballistic missiles in Kaliningrad if President Obama did not pursue the construction of a missile shield. As the President evaluates that policy choice, where is he and how does this statement from the Russian Deputy Prime Minister affect those deliberations?

MR. GIBBS: Well, this administration will be candid with the Russians when we disagree, but seeks a deeper and greater cooperation on issues of mutual national interest. The President's position on those missiles are if they're -- if they are technologically capable and effective and make sense from a fiscal standpoint, then it's something that he'll look at. So obviously any sense of -- without commenting specifically on what he said -- any sense of greater cooperation from Russia is something that we want to foster and we look forward to continuing to work with them on mutual areas of agreement.

Q One last one. Has the White House moved the control of the Census Bureau into the White House for the purposes of the 2010 census, and if so why?

MR. GIBBS: No, the -- I think the historical precedent of this is there's a director of the census that works for the Secretary of Commerce, the President, and also works closely with the White House, to ensure a timely and accurate count. And that's what we have in this instance.

Yes, sir.

Q Robert, can I look ahead to Monday and the rollout of the financial rescue package rewrite -- is this just about changing or clarifying, improving the rules for the second half of the existing program, or are you going to be on that asking for more money?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I don't want to get ahead of Secretary Geithner's speech on Monday, or to prejudge what amounts may or may not be necessary to stabilize our financial system. 

The most important thing, as we move forward on the second amount of money to stabilize the system is that we do it differently than the way it's been done before. You all saw reports today from Elizabeth Warren's commission about the valuation of assets and the money that the government paid. We had an announcement at the White House that pertains to the way executives are compensated, that receive an extraordinary amount of assistance from taxpayers to keep their banks going.

We hope that the next set of money will also -- money that banks get will be money that banks lend to businesses large and small, and to families, and that we will also begin to address the burgeoning home foreclosure crisis that affects so many out in America.

All of those will be proposals that, in some form or another, will be contained in what the Secretary talks about -- has talked about and will talk about on Monday and will talk about going forward.

Q But you're not able to say, at this point, whether Monday is going to include a call for additional money, whether or not it's further down the road.

MR. GIBBS: I don't have -- I have not read the speech, and I wouldn't get ahead of Secretary Geithner as it relates to that, even if I had.

Jeff.

Q When I asked you the question about traveling yesterday, you said the President was confident that his message about the stimulus plan was getting through. You said he'd made his points clear through interviews and other things. What changed from yesterday at this hour till right now, in terms of traveling to Elkhart, a place that has unemployment problems, and Fort Myers?

MR. GIBBS: I don't -- the President wants to extend that conversation and continue it directly with the American people. We can do it here; we can do it there. We're going to do it in -- I was going to do a Dr. Seuss but I decided not to. (Laughter.) 

Q A horse is a horse. 

MR. GIBBS: Be careful. The -- you know, I think the President looks forward to getting out of town for a few hours and talking directly with people that are affected. He has spent time here working through the process of creating and moving forward an economic recovery and reinvestment plan, whether it's interviews that happen here and are heard elsewhere. 

I think this is just a continuing effort by the President to demonstrate what he's fighting for and why it's so important for the American people. 

Q Has that message not gotten through up until this point?

MR. GIBBS: No, I think the message has. And I think we've made significant progress through the legislative process. I think whether it's today or the next few days, we'll make -- we'll take more important steps toward moving this thing forward. And certainly given today's numbers, it's important to go directly to where people are hurting -- whether it's Indiana or whether it's Florida -- and discuss directly with them the price of inaction and what he thinks we can do to put people back to work and invest long term in what will help grow our economy for years to come. 

Q Robert, is he going to take members of Congress with him on this trip? And are these trips aimed at those members of Congress, either who go with him or coming -- back in Washington?

MR. GIBBS: You can imagine the plane that we -- that I traveled on last night, and will travel on Monday or Tuesday, is a popular mode of transportation. I believe and I hope that members of Congress and members of the Senate will travel with the President on each of those trips. 

This is not designed specifically to cajole or -- any member of Congress. It's an effort for the President to talk to the American people about what's at stake.

Q Can I ask you a separate question?

MR. GIBBS: Major already did, but sure. (Laughter.)

Q Following his lead. On the Supreme Court, can you talk about the kind of mechanisms that are in place to think about a potential retirement or two down the road? 

MR. GIBBS: I don't -- I think it would be inappropriate for me to get ahead of anything like that. I spoke yesterday that the -- obviously the President's thoughts and prayers were with Justice Ginsburg and her family right now. I believe a little later this afternoon the President is going to talk to her. I'll try to get a readout from that, but I don't want to get too far down the road.

Q The President I understand is planning to go to Chicago. Can you say --

MR. GIBBS: (Laughter.) Are you guys -- can I not make any news from up here? (Laughter.)

Q Can you say what he's planning to do? Does he have public events? And will he be staying in Hyde Park?

MR. GIBBS: I believe he will be staying in Hyde Park. The week ahead is going to be, like, a few days in the future. Next Friday he will work here in the morning and the afternoon, and then sometime late afternoon/early evening will travel to Chicago and spend the weekend there. I would assume it's Hyde Park; I will double-check. The only plans I know of is I'm sure the President and the First Lady will go out for Valentine's Day. And even if I knew where they were going, I wouldn't tell you until next week. But no, they definitely -- they'll spend the weekend -- I don't know whether, in all honesty, departure is -- from Chicago back here is Sunday yet or Monday.

Q How is the White House responding or how do you respond to the concerns of African American and Latino officials about Judd Gregg being in charge of the census given in the past he's not always supported additional funding for the census and they believe that isn't -- doesn't have sufficient concerns over making sure everybody is counted?

MR. GIBBS: I think everybody can be assured that any person that is picked by the President to work for this President implement the views of this President. And President Obama obviously is -- believes that we have to, for a lot of reasons, have a fair and accurate count during the next census. And that's, as President of the United States, exactly what he intends to do.

Q Will the White House involvement with the census office be -- is that partly to ensure that that indeed happens?

MR. GIBBS: No, I think -- I think any -- any cooperation with that is historical in nature.

Q You spoke about cajoling a moment ago. This weekend there are going to be economic recovery house meetings conducted by Organized for Obama -- for America, which is a continuation of Obama for America. Does the President want to see the people who attend those meetings, and the 13 million other names on the mailing list, actually pick up the phone and lobby members of Congress to pass the stimulus bill?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I -- the President has spoken often about the continued involvement not just of those that were involved with his campaign and election in November, but all over the country -- weigh in on matters involving them and their government. It's often said you -- the government you get is equal to the government that you participate in. I think he hopes that regardless of your opinion that people participate actively in decisions that affect them and their neighbors, particularly on an issue as important as moving this economy forward.

Q But will he make an explicit call? You may be too young to remember when Reagan did this twenty -- (laughter) --

MR. GIBBS: You're very kind to say such a thing.

Q But he gave speeches on TV in which he tasked voters, those who supported --

MR. GIBBS: I remember the rabbit ears. (Laughter.)

Q It was in color back then, too. (Laughter.) But he gave speeches asking people to pick up the phone and call their members and make an explicit demand to pass this legislation. I mean, rather than just saying that it's good that people participate and are engaged, will the President --

MR. GIBBS: I think it would be safe to assume that the President will ask those that support him, or supported him in November, to continue to support his efforts as part of a recovery plan to move this -- to move this economy forward.

April.

Q Robert, back on unemployment numbers, overall 7.6 percent, but then there's a breakdown -- Hispanics, 9.7 percent; then African Americans or blacks, 12.6 percent. Now, are Hispanic and African American leaders being briefed by this White House or are these groups in any way vested in the job creation component of the stimulus package?

MR. GIBBS: They looked at last night when he went to speak to the House Democratic Caucus -- I think it's safe to say that the President and his staff have been in touch with many members of Congress about -- you already look like you don't like my answer. (Laughter.) I haven't even finished it. 

Q No, I know that you talk to Congress, but I'm not just talking Congress; I'm talking the broad-based community. There are more leaders -- African American/Hispanic leaders -- than just the Congress.

MR. GIBBS: Sure. They were -- some of them were here today as part of the President's new advisory board for the economic recovery -- CEOs that have been here, mayors that have been here, governors that have been here, interest groups that have been here. This White House is reaching out, as I've said many times, to anybody and everyone who wishes to work toward a process and a proposal that will get this economy moving again and creating the millions of jobs that we need to save or create to replace the millions that we've lost. 

Q Do you believe that the black community and the Hispanic community are vested in this?

MR. GIBBS: I do. I think those numbers demonstrate that -- their involvement in the economy. They understand the crisis that -- that they understand the crisis that our economy is in. And they are anxious to see Washington move forward and get something done.

Mark. 

Q Robert, is the President already feeling cooped up in the White House? (Laughter.) You said today that the President looks forward to getting out for a few hours. When he was at the charter school the other day, he told the kids that he likes getting out of the White House.

MR. GIBBS: Safe to say. (Laughter.) Look, you know, some of you have covered him and some of you haven't. But he's a bit of a restless soul. His idea of a crazy day is to take a long walk. 

Q A long walk where? (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS: In solitude and isolation, April. (Laughter.)

Q Out there?

MR. GIBBS: No. On Saturday, the First Family will go to Camp David, and stay overnight before returning on Sunday.

Q Somebody was going to ask about that. (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS: You know, I feel like we're playing the Jeopardy version of the week ahead. And so far I'm at "Camp David for $600." (Laughter.) So I don't know if there's anything else that I have to announce. I'm just going to go ahead and do this. Let's just go ahead and do this. Hold on, hold on, hold on. 

On Wednesday, the President will be in Washington, D.C. (Laughter.) As you know, on Thursday he will travel to Springfield, Illinois, and travel back that night. Also on Wednesday, the Vice President will visit a school in Northern Virginia to talk about and highlight the recovery package that is moving through Congress. I feel like we just did the whole grand finale and -- yes, sir.

Q On some of the spending cuts that they're considering in the Senate, including on the schools -- you mentioned the Vice President going to a school on Wednesday -- does the President feel, possibly because of the PR hits that the package is taking and the fact that it's going down a little bit in the polls, that it would be better off with the kind of cuts that the bipartisan group is likely to come up with? Would he prefer that it be slimmed down in that way, or does he want to -- would he want that amendment to be defeated?

MR. GIBBS: Well, we're not going to get -- as I said yesterday, these -- President Obama and Vice President Biden have traded their old jobs for new ones. We're not going to get involved in what the -- each and every move that the Senate is doing. As I said earlier, the President's -- the number the President is focused on right now and every day moving forward is the number of jobs that a piece of legislation and a proposal to help this economy recover are the number of jobs it can create. That's what he's focused on.

We will have the process move forward. We look forward to that happening. But our focus is on what that recovery plan will do to put the millions of people that have already received pink slips back to work.

Michael.

Q I want to try again to ask a question that's sort of been asked before --

MR. GIBBS: Camp David?

Q No. (Laughter.) Is it -- does the President or do you see a tension between the President's goal of bipartisanship and the need to get something done urgently? And I wonder, as the economy is deteriorating at a rapid -- more rapid rate, whether that is going to necessarily impede that first goal that was more pronounced in the first couple weeks here –

MR. GIBBS: Your first goal being the bipartisanship?

Q Bipartisanship.

MR. GIBBS: No, I think the -- again, I think today's numbers underscore, partly because of the math involved in the Senate and partly because of the math involved by the Bureau of Labor and Statistics, that we do -- we work in a bipartisan fashion to get something done quickly. I don't think there has to be an either/or mentality to this, and neither does the President. In order to get something moved forward, we're going to have to work with Democrats and Republicans. 

But the statistics today underscore more than ever, more than last month, more than the month before that, and certainly taken in total through the course of this recession, we see a jobs market that is deteriorating rapidly and that pace is accelerating; that we have to do -- and this Congress and this President have to do what is necessary now to move the process forward and to get this economy back on track.

Margaret.

Q Thanks. Robert, it's a Guantanamo follow-up, and I'm wondering -- there's a controversy right now in Britain and I'm wondering whether President Obama or the administration is planning to release or allow Britain to release some classified documents that are related to the alleged torture of a British resident held in Guantanamo -- what you can tell us about that, whether it's been resolved or not.

MR. GIBBS: I don't have any information on that, but I can do some checking.

Q Is the President concerned that the Pakistani nuclear scientist A.Q. Khan could be a proliferation risk now he's been released from house arrest? And will he renew the U.S. request for him to be interviewed by U.S. intelligence agencies?

MR. GIBBS: Well, obviously we've seen the reports of the release, but have not received -- have yet to receive official word from the government. Obviously this President has made clear many times the great concern that he has about nuclear proliferation, and as we hear from the government about these reports, obviously the President and this government want assurances that Dr. Khan is not involved or engaged in any of the activity that resulted in his house arrest earlier.

Q Robert, you mentioned on Guantanamo earlier, I think in response to Jake's question, that the President's main concern was that there be swift justice there. My recollection from the campaign, though, was that his main concern was that it was a fundamentally unfair process. Is that still his concern, that this process that was going forward, the military commissions, were going to be unfair to the accused down there?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that the process has resulted in a failure to move forward and bring about that justice. The President also has -- believes that the detention facility there has not made us safer. In signing the executive order, the President discussed first his primary responsibility to the American people, which is to keep them safe; second, to underscore and understand our values in keeping this country safe; and finally, to do all that we can to protect the men and women that protect our freedom each day. He thought the best way to ensure all of those things was through the executive order that set up a process by which detainees would be evaluated and the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay would be closed.

Q So his main concern was not that people's rights were being violated?

MR. GIBBS: I think his concern was that the American people weren't seeing the swift justice that they deserved.

Q Robert, you like to say you like to step back on issues. On the -- 

MR. GIBBS: And if Mr. Feller said "thank you," that's when I probably would have stepped back. (Laughter.) 

Q On the legislation, notwithstanding the President's efforts, he did not attract a single Republican in the House and he's having lots of difficulty getting any Republican support in the Senate. What lesson do you draw from that?

MR. GIBBS: As I've said earlier, that sometimes old habits die hard, that changing the ways that the town works won't happen in the first three weeks of the administration. But I think the lesson the President has always drawn in his career is that we can disagree about ideas or policies without being disagreeable, and that the best way to move forward is by working together across party or ideological differences to get something done for the American people.

Q Was it another lesson that this sort of fist in the velvet glove approach -- last night, his change in tone was pretty tough.

MR. GIBBS: I think the President's tone denotes the economic crisis that we face. Whether it was unemployment claims yesterday, or unemployment numbers today, or numbers that will come in the future, I think they underscore the real need for us to work together, move the process forward, get something on the President's desk so that the help that the American people need will get to them as quickly as possible.

You have a news conference question? Yes.

Q Exactly. First of all, thank you so much for letting us know in advance. I mean that. And I hope you'll continue that pattern. 

MR. GIBBS: We expect the quality of questions will be directly influenced by the amount of time with which you have to prepare. (Laughter.) 

Q It really, really is very, very helpful. What will the format be? Will there be an opening statement? How long will it last? And will the President ask questions from a seating chart, the way the last President did?

Q She wants a question. (Laughter.) 

Q I do. 

MR. GIBBS: As if you don't, April. (Laughter.) 

I don't have exact timing. It's at 8:00 p.m. The President will give and deliver an opening statement before taking questions. You're ahead of me on the seating chart, but we'll have -- the press advance guys will have more information on that. But he will make an opening statement on the recovery plan.

Q Is he going to do it in the East Room, Robert?

MR. GIBBS: Yes, it's in the East Room.

Q It's Friday, let's ask about the raccoons. Have you found the raccoon?

MR. GIBBS: I should have Bill do this, because he's our chief deputy spokesperson for wildlife. (Laughter.) Actually, right before we came out here, Bill got on a phone in my office and asked for -- literally, asked for a raccoon update. (Laughter.) There are a few that roam in my backyard, so I don't -- I don't have any particular tips, and no raccoons that I know of have been caught or dispersed in other places in Washington.

Q Are they looking for acorns? (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS: Or stimulus votes. 

Q Thank you. 

END                  2:27 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 2/11/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
_____________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                                          February 11, 2009
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Robert Gibbs
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
2:18 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS:  My apologies for being late.  Let me just take a second and get set up here.  A couple quick announcements before we get started.  The President spoke today with Governor Henry of Oklahoma, and both Senators Inhofe and Coburn about the deadly tornadoes that struck there, and passed along his condolences and best wishes to the victims.
Later this afternoon, as many of you know, state transportation officials from nearly every state are here at the White House and speaking with Secretary LaHood.  They will be visiting the stakeout location at 3:15 p.m. to discuss infrastructure needs and projects that are ready to go, once a recovery and reinvestment plan is through Congress and signed by the President.  So you guys can go out and hear all of them. 
And with that, let's take a few questions.  Yes, ma'am.
Q    Thanks, Robert.  Going back to Secretary Geithner's announcement yesterday on the bailout, can you talk about why the administration didn't realize that the market reaction was going to be so bad, and why there weren't more details attached to it?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me -- I'm going to give a broader answer to -- sort of a broader walk-through of the plan.  But one of the things I'll talk about is that yesterday's speech and framework were not designed for a one-day market reaction.  I think we can all go back in the both recent and not so recent history and see that one-day announcements have provided positive changes in the market for plans that ultimately turned out to be unsuccessful, just as negative reactions have sometimes been at the forefront of plans that worked.  The plan that the Secretary outlined is not designed, though, to take care of the market for one day.
Let me walk through just sort of a little bit broader answer on the plan, though.  Obviously, as many of you know, we've dealt with this for quite some time.  This is an enormously complicated problem.  And to date, the program that has dealt with many of these bad investments and bad assets has been flawed.  It's important that as we move forward, that the government is able to follow through on the commitments that it makes. 
Secretary Geithner understands that, again, as I said, this is not going to be judged on the one-day market reaction, but instead by what is best for the long-term economic health of America.
Understand -- let's understand a few things of what the Secretary talked about yesterday.  He outlined -- what he outlined was comprehensive.  It addresses not simply the needs of banks, but also the financial system in general, as well as the needed access to capital by America's businesses and families.  It's based on transparency and integrity, through a comprehensive scrub of the financial system and a rigorous evaluation of the need in the financial system.  And it recognizes that the problem cannot be solved and will not be solved with taxpayer funding alone; that this must work with and for the private sector.
Some of that market reaction may be based on what the plan does not do -- right?  I'm sure many in the banking sector had hoped, presumably, that bad assets would be paid for either in an unreasonable way or at an unreasonable value, or that insurance that -- whose cost is borne primarily by the taxpayers but might primarily benefit shareholders isn't, in this case, part of that solution.
I've counseled many times in my very brief tenure of standing up here not to always judge leaks in the newspaper as fact.  I know -- I have no doubt that at some point in this briefing today somebody is going to ask me about Secretary Gates and the decision to send more troops to Afghanistan -- a decision I have counseled that the President has yet to make, despite reading it many times in the newspaper.  I have no doubt that what some people read in the newspaper charged their excitement and expectations up about something that wasn't ultimately in a plan.
Q    Are you talking about --
MR. GIBBS:  That's certainly one of them, yes.
Q    If I could just push back just a little bit, I mean, I understand you're -- you want to play down the implications of one day in the market.  But markets thrive on certainty, and a lot of the commentary yesterday was that there wasn't enough certainty, there wasn't enough detail in the plan for them to know what it would do.  Maybe it is the right thing, but how do they know if they're not given a clearer readout?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, let's again go through -- obviously there are going to be twists and turns in all of this.  But let's look at some of what the plan addresses and how it focuses on some of the greatest and biggest weaknesses of what we saw beforehand.  One, this is predicated on transparency and disclosure in an effort to restore market confidence -- something that everybody criticized the previous plan for lacking.  This puts private capital into the system and doesn't rely solely or completely on taxpayer funding.
For the very first time, the response is coordinated across each agency in the federal government that regulates the financial system.  We are -- the plan evaluates the health and the condition of individual financial institutions, again, to understand what's needed, to understand their health, and to ultimately, again, restore that confidence.  And primarily, first and foremost, there's a dramatic expansion that provides -- that will provide lending for the entities that we know need it most.  We all hear horror stories about people with good credit that are looking for a student loan, or for an auto loan, or for a housing or commercial real estate loan that can't get access to that capital. 
The announcement yesterday expands a program that's happening right now at the Fed at a rate of about $200 billion that expands to -- with a fluctuation of -- or with both public and private money, about a trillion dollars' worth of lending.  So I would also say that in terms of detail that that's, again, a program that's working now and will be expanded. 
Secondly, some of the stress tests involved and regulators looking at the health of institutions is ongoing.  So I think that the market certainty that will be provided ultimately is by a plan that is focused not just on yesterday or today, but how do we best stabilize that financial system in the long run.
Again, this isn't something that happened last month or that even took only a year to get us involved in.  In pulling -- particularly one aspect of the plan that's talked about is pulling bad assets off of balance sheets, which hasn't been done, that I know of, with active institutions -- right?  We talk about RTC, which was set up largely to divide up bad assets for banks that were closed.  So it's taken us a while to get to this point.  It's undoubtedly going to take us some time to get to a system of financial stability.  But I think the beginnings of a framework to do just that were outlined yesterday by the Secretary.
Q    Robert, if I can follow up on Jennifer's question, do you feel -- the President said on Monday night in his press conference Secretary Geithner would unveil details the next day.  Do you feel that -- do you feel that it was ready?  Was the plan ready?  Does the President feel it was ready?  And number two, if so, is he pleased with how it was communicated yesterday and how it was rolled out?
MR. GIBBS:  I was going to say, you're not judging me already, are you?  Again, I think there's a -- again, I think there's a tendency to look at simply one measurement of this, and by and large that measurement was a few stock markets.  I don't believe -- 
Q    Well, a few stock markets that people all over the country are investing in.
MR. GIBBS:  I understand, I understand.  But what I'm saying is the plan wasn't created, nor do I think it should be judged by a one-day reaction in any of those stock markets.  The plan that was outlined was ready.  Again, part of what this plan will do will be to consult with those private entities in not just the formation, but the execution of the plan.  And those consultations are ongoing. 
But again, the -- again, I just hesitate to judge the breadth of this and the comprehensiveness of this based on one day's reaction.  I don't think that's -- I don't think that's how we judge the health of the financial system and I don't think it should be how one judges this plan.
Q    Even if you don't -- even if you disregard the fall in the market, there was widespread confusion about the plan, period.  Is that a result of poor communication, or is that a result of it not -- just all the details not being there?
MR. GIBBS:  You know, I would ask you to go back and look at all of the news on this, read beyond the larger font and the bigger, bolder print, and dig deep into many of the things that I outlined that were pointed out as big weaknesses in the previous plan that are addressed by what Secretary Geithner said yesterday -- a plan that's based on transparency and disclosure; something that works with the private markets and understands that the taxpayers alone can't do all of this work; that coordinates among the agencies that are involved; that evaluates the financial health of the system and the individual banks, and does so by greatly expanding a program that we think will help provide credit to families and businesses and to people looking to buy homes right now.
I think if you look through this you'll find -- you'll undoubtedly find, as I said, some disappointment by people that had hoped that there would be some large big bank announced that would take up in one fell swoop everything that had been wrong with the system over the course of several years and wipe it away overnight.  But I think the President was very clear yesterday in saying there's no easy way out of this.  There's no easy way out of this for the country, and there's also no easy way out of this for Wall Street.
Jake.
Q    The President this morning, Robert, talked about the fact that the CEO of Caterpillar had praised the idea of a stimulus package, and how the company had recently announced 20,000 layoffs and if the stimulus package passes, they'll be able to rehire some of those people.  And the CEO, according to local press in Peoria, is going to deliver that message to the President tomorrow, although I guess the President already got it somehow.
MR. GIBBS:  Text.  (Laughter.) 
Q    He texted it.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Well, he is on the recovery board, right?  I guess two things.  Caterpillar has also opposed the "buy American" provisions in the stimulus package.  Recently a spokesman for Caterpillar said that they were like snake oil.  And I know that the final package is still being finalized.  But I'm wondering, that, and the fact that Caterpillar -- probably one of the companies that most supports the Colombia free trade agreement, and says that the stalling of that on Capitol Hill -- and I believe the President also has expressed concerns about that free trade agreement -- that that stalling is basically sending a message to businesses in Colombia, please buy Canadian products, not American.  Does Caterpillar's support for the Colombian free trade agreement and opposition to the "Buy American" provisions, under the same idea of what's good for their workers and good business, would that have any effect on the President's thinking?
MR. GIBBS:  On those two issues?
Q    Yes, Colombia and "Buy American."
MR. GIBBS:  I'd certainly -- I'll talk to the President about that.  I think his concerns with the Colombian free trade agreement and -- as it relates to labor and environmental standards being a core part of those agreements -- I think have been laid out extensively in the campaign.
Obviously you heard the President speak about a week ago about ensuring that, while we have strong "Buy American" laws on our books that should be heeded as the law, they're also -- they also have to be done in a way, in this bill -- the provision has to be done in a way so as not to spark a larger trade disagreement at a time of economic peril.  And I think that's why the provisions that were in I believe the Senate legislation ultimately included those -- a strong provision to "Buy American," but also to do that in a way that didn't violate existing trade agreements. 
The President believed that that was a necessary and positive compromise that allowed those provisions to be in the bill, and I presume that, without speaking directly for Caterpillar, that they found that to be a positive development, as well.
They did communicate to the White House a reevaluation of their employment situation based on what they see as a big investment that could be coming shortly to put Americans back to work and to put, particularly, those workers in Peoria and downstate Illinois area, in particular, back to work.  We're encouraged by that development.  You saw the President today at an infrastructure project in Northern Virginia, that with the right kind of plan presumably is something that can -- phases three and four of that project can begin work and put people back to work. 
I think in many ways we are hopeful that businesses across this country, in particular, will evaluate the positive impacts of a recovery and reinvestment plan and hopefully plan their businesses accordingly.  We've certainly seen alternative energy companies, wind developers that have taken positively to what potentially could be in a final agreement.  We hope that that's also true for construction companies like Caterpillar, and it's why we believe that with the right plan we can get this economy moving again by putting people back to work quickly.
Q    Just to follow up, I'm sorry.  Wouldn't the Colombia free trade agreement, since that's not like -- unlike some other past trade agreements, that's not one that American workers are necessarily worried about costing American jobs -- opposition to it has more to do with human rights and Colombia and environmental concerns -- wouldn't rethinking that free trade agreement, given the state of this economy, also be a logical step?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, what I don't want to do is conflate the reinvestment and recovery plan directly with the President's thinking on an individual trade agreement.  I think the concerns that he and others have are still valid around that trade agreement, and we certainly don't want discussions on that to get in the way of a recovery or reinvestment plan moving ahead quickly.
Ed.
Q    Robert, what -- the reports on the Hill are suggesting that they're pretty close to a final deal.  The President had Senator Reid and Speaker Pelosi here yesterday.  You haven't given us a readout on that yet.  How did that meeting go?  What's the level of the President's involvement?  Is he working the phones?  Is he -- you know, what's he doing to push beyond his public speeches?  And are you encouraged by what you're hearing?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, I've watched some of the remarks from people involved directly in the negotiations, and I am, like them, reticent to read out minute by minute what is going on.  I've said this and I'll continue to say that the White House believes we're making -- taking steps to make good progress toward a final solution on this recovery plan that will have a positive impact on our economy.
We're certainly hopeful, as we have been throughout this process, to get it done quickly.  I don't know whether that announcement is today or soon, but we're certainly hopeful.  It appears as if we've got -- again, we've got Democrats and Republicans working together to get an agreement moved forward. 
We've, quite frankly, always been hopeful about this process.  We think enormous progress in a very short period of time has been made, getting it through the House and, as the President announced during the town hall meeting yesterday, getting it through the United States Senate.  I think that that progress continues.  Obviously you guys know that members of our budget team were up on Capitol Hill late last night, as was our Chief of Staff, hoping to get an agreement quickly for the American people.
Q    Back on Geithner, you said before you've got to get past the headlines and the bold type and look at the details.  Barney Frank, a key Democrat, is saying that he's disappointed that there was nothing on the housing crisis in this rollout.  Where is your plan?  I mean, every economist across the board says housing is at the root of this.  People -- thousands of people every week are being thrown out of their homes.  Where is your plan?
MR. GIBBS:  Thousands of people every day.
Q    Where's your plan?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, as the President said yesterday in visiting the location that was -- that had the highest rate of home foreclosure of any area in the country last year, that that likely was coming very soon.   And I agree wholeheartedly with his timetable.
Q    So -- but you've been in office for a few weeks.  Now, I know it's still early --
MR. GIBBS:  Almost -- almost four.
Q    Okay.  So -- but how many times can you keep saying "soon"?  I mean, this isn't the root of the problem.  Why was that not the top priority of the Geithner plan?  You know, you're saying people wanted a bad bank --
MR. GIBBS:  I wonder if Jennifer's question would have been phrased differently had we focused on one rather than the other.  And I think you've heard the President speak -- if there was one thing and only one thing that we had to be worried about or involved in, the President would be involved in it -- as he is right now.  Unfortunately, we've got a recovery and reinvestment plan that has to put people back to work in order to get this economy moving.  We have a financial stability package that has to be put in place so that the money that the taxpayers have given and appropriated to deal with this financial system and what's wrong with it can be spent differently now than it was before, and restore confidence not just in consumers, I think, but in the way government acts. 
Involved in that is also dealing with home foreclosures.  There's also an entire series of reregulation that the President has been working on because, most of all, you could certainly say regulation -- to ensure that we never find ourselves in this situation again -- being reinstituted is tremendously important.  There are many legs on this stool, as the President has talked about.  The President is working on each and every one of those.
Q    But isn't housing the one that the American people really feel the most, more than --
MR. GIBBS:  You know, if somebody has a house but not a job, my guess is they'd say a job.  If somebody has a job but not a house they might say the home foreclosure.  If somebody has lost their job because -- or can't get a loan because of something that a CEO did in rigging the system, my sense is they might say regulation. 
Or my guess is that millions of people all across this country are struggling with a little bit of each one of these problems.  We feel very confident that in the very short period of time that the President has been here that we've made remarkable progress on getting a recovery and reinvestment plan through, a process that we believe will quickly get aid out to the American people. 
We'll announce a plan to deal with the rising number of foreclosures that are happening each and every day.  We'll discuss a financial stability package, not just to prevent or to be rated by the market in one day, but look toward long-term health, as well as begin the process with members of Congress on both sides of the aisle to reregulate the financial industry.
Again, if we only had to do one thing, we'd probably have lighter circles under our eyes and a little bit more of a spring in our step.  But my sense is that we're working every day -- morning, noon, and night -- to get that -- to get those solutions through Congress and on the President's desk and out quickly, more importantly, to the American people.
Chip.
Q    Following up on Ed's first question, we're told that the stimulus deal that may be announced pretty soon up on Capitol Hill is unlikely to attract much more, if any, additional Republican support.  Is the President at the point now where he's saying that he won the election, the American people are behind him, according to the polls, and the Republicans can either support his plan or get out of the way?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, he's clearly won the election.  That's -- that's more based on the occupation of our current real estate.  (Laughter.)  I don't want to get ahead of what an agreement might look like.  You certainly saw members over the weekend, as the Senate struck an agreement, wanting time to evaluate whatever might be in that agreement in order to evaluate their support for it.  So I don't want to -- I certainly don't want to get ahead of an agreement and ahead on what others might do to look through that agreement to see whether it's something that they can support. 
Our hope is that members of Congress from both parties will look through and find a balanced approach that provides some stimulus to the economy that will create jobs and get people working again, put money directly into people's pockets, make the necessary long-term investments to ensure our long-term economic growth, and to do so in a way that gives people confidence based on the transparency and accountability that's in that legislation.
Without getting into or knowing the exact levels of each of those specifics, I think it's hard to prejudge what support may or may not happen.
Q    I'm asking more about his mind-set.  Have you seen a change as Republicans have refused to respond to his overtures?  Is he now saying, hey, it's my way or the highway?
MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't think so at all.  I mean, we had a Republican congressman with us on Monday.  We met a Republican governor in Florida on Tuesday.  We're --
Q    Very small numbers, though.
MR. GIBBS:  Florida is a pretty big state.  (Laughter.)
Q    One governor.
MR. GIBBS:  There are certainly many Republican governors that support it.  I think that to look through -- look, there's no doubt that people are going to look at who votes for what.  The President, as I've said many times, and he has, too, is focused not on what the score is on the outcome, but how many jobs this plan can and will create to put people back to work.  I think that's how people in America are looking at this.  I think that's -- the people that came and -- came to the town hall meetings and asked the President questions, I think that's how they look at it, too.
Individual members of Congress will certainly make up their minds and -- through an evaluation of the specifics of any final agreement.  That's not going to change the President's reaching out to Democrats and Republicans.  This isn't the first or the last issue that either this White House or Congress will deal with this year.  And obviously that outreach is going to continue on any number of issues to ensure that we get some -- we hope to get their support on many things particularly dealing with an economic recovery.
Q    Are we in the seventh-inning stretch now?
MR. GIBBS:  You know, I was -- I fear we're now past the seventh-inning stretch, and I had -- I had hoped to use these fancy screens, have a little Harry Caray going, but we may have zipped right by the seventh-inning stretch, and just for your own edification, well past last call.  (Laughter.)
Q    I was struck by what you I guess were implying about -- you said some of us are going to ask about comments that Secretary Gates said, or I guess you were saying that they were leaked.  But these were --
MR. GIBBS:  No, no, no, no.
Q    Secretary Gates said --
MR. GIBBS:  No, no.
Q    -- the President is going to make a decision about --
MR. GIBBS:  Let me make sure --
Q    -- troops in Afghanistan in a couple of days, and he said that a couple of days ago.
MR. GIBBS:  No, I think he said it yesterday.
Q    Okay, but -- well, okay, a couple of days --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me be more clear on the point that I was trying to make.  I think we've all read about the decisions that have already been made twice, yet I've already gotten emails today about when the President is going to make the decision he's already made twice.  My counsel is just to --
Q    I understand -- but the Secretary of Defense, a quote from him -- this is not a leak or an attribution to a source close to the situation.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's probe this for a second.  What does the Secretary of Defense say?  What did he precisely say?
Q    The President is going to make a decision in a couple of days.
MR. GIBBS:  And that is completely accurate.  My admonition is take heed in what he says, because many have asked about the ramifications of the decision that have already been made.  But the Secretary is saying it's coming soon.  I agree with him.
Q    Fair enough.  Is it possible that he will -- the President will make this -- will implement -- that this decision gets implemented before he announces the decision to the American people?
MR. GIBBS:  Not that I'm aware of.  Obviously I think he would want to be in consultation with any families that might be involved in the decision that he makes and as well as members of Congress.
Q    Does he feel he needs to make a public sort of speech, or say -- explain why he needs to send more troops, or something like that?
MR. GIBBS:  I think you can be satisfied that when the President makes the decision and activates that decision, that you'll know about the decision as well as the reasoning behind it.  I think the President believes that that's very, very important to do.  I talked yesterday on the plane about a review process that looks into our policy in Afghanistan and Pakistan that's ongoing over the course of the next 60 days or so, to reevaluate where we are.  I think that's all accurate and I think that's all very much what the Secretary is working on. 
My last admonition -- if you'll look at last week's press guidance, you'll see Secretary Gates on the schedule.  If you wait a week, you'll see him again.  The Secretary has a standing meeting.  It normally happens on days -- on Tuesdays.  It happens today because we were out of town yesterday.  So I guess my only thing is that -- I think you'll see Secretary Gates on the schedule throughout the year.  It doesn't always mean --
Q    We should not assume that he is telling the Secretary, here's my decision on Afghanistan and that's happening right now?
MR. GIBBS:  Since I'm not in that meeting, I don't know what exactly the President will say to him.  It's likely the topic will come up.  I'm saying the meeting isn't scheduled simply to deal with this, it's part of a standing meeting that the President and his Secretary of Defense have.
Q    Totally off topic, what's the decision behind having the First Lady participate in a Vogue cover shoot?  Should we read anything into her role --
MR. GIBBS:  You'll be surprised to know I'm not a subscriber.  (Laughter.)
Q    What is her -- what does this say about the role she wants to play as First Lady?
MR. GIBBS:  I think many people, myself included, are enormously proud of the First Lady.  I think that throughout the campaign she expressed interest in issues like the work/family balance, something that she and the President have dealt with over the course of their marriage and with children, as many of us deal with.  She's also been very involved in issues about military families, which I anticipate her continuing. 
I don't think any one thing or one interview speaks definitively about the First Lady.  I think -- obviously the President is and we're enormously proud of who she is and what she represents and the issues that she's going to continue to be involved in -- chief among them, as a mother, in ensuring that the girls have a routine that, in an otherwise fairly insane process, has kept them very normal and very rooted.
Jonathan.
Q    Now, a lot of people on Wall Street I think would agree with you on your assessment that much of the selling yesterday was because there were things that were not announced yesterday they expect --
MR. GIBBS:  Can you talk to Ed after this?
Q    Yes. 
MR. GIBBS:  Okay.  (Laughter.) 
Q    But they would say that the reason -- much of the speculation over this was because of the White House's over-zealousness and fear of leaks and that your -- you did not collaborate, you did not talk to them about what you were doing and what you were going to come up with.
MR. GIBBS:  Didn't talk to who?  Wall Street?
Q    Wall Street.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the President feels -- feels, as well as the Secretary and his economic team, we have -- feel comfortable with having reached out.  Obviously the collaboration involved continues.  I'm going to decide not to give part of my -- the answer that I'd originally constructed.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Can you say what you were just thinking?  (Laughter.) 
MR. GIBBS:  If you guys could see the bubble box, you'll know that --
Q    We can't write it down unless you say it.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  That's why I'm not going to say it.  No, again, I think that the people that have been involved in the creation of the plan that the Secretary outlined yesterday, throughout the agencies in this government that have to coordinate the response -- the federal response to financial stability, would say that the outreach has been quite vigorous.  People have been involved in both -- that work in both government and in the private sector.  But, look, the transparency involved continues on our side, the collaboration with the private sector.  Obviously one of the strengths of the plan involves an understanding that it's not just taxpayer money, it's private money, as well, that's going to help solve this problem, and that collaboration will continue.
Q    How can you simultaneously say you have been transparent and you took a lot of people on Wall Street by surprise?    
MR. GIBBS:  Well, what I said was that I think some of what was put out there may not altogether have been true -- right?  Many people that -- I know people that have talked to me always got counseled -- I've said it any number of times from this podium -- to be very leery and very careful about policy before it's announced.  I've certainly said that enough to turn blue in the face.  It's my admonition yesterday and today -- and sometimes expectations based on something that's in the newspaper or on cable television that isn't true may inflate expectations about what may or may not happen, or what won't happen.
Do I think some of those market expectations happen?  Probably.  I don't doubt that there was also a psychology involved, as I said, about a hope and a wish that something would -- bad assets would be paid for in an unreasonable way may also have inflated some of those expectations.
But again, I think that brings me back to my first answer with Jennifer, which is, I think it's important not to look at a market reaction over the course of one or even several days, but the horizon in which -- the financial and economic team look at this not based on some set time period, but what in the long term will help the health of our economy.
Q    Robert, can I interrupt you for just a second.  Senator Reid has announced that there was a deal on the stimulus package.
MR. GIBBS:  I would like to announce -- (laughter.)  If I can read your BlackBerry, I might be able to give you some --
Q    We all have it. 
MR. GIBBS:  Oh, there you go.  And you guys are in here listening to me.  (Laughter.)  Hopefully when I'm far better briefed on the announcement that Ms. Loven just made, I'll have a far better reaction.
Q    Will you have a statement or something, Robert?
MR. GIBBS:  Soon.  Once these guys -- (laughter.)
Q    Understood.  Can I go back to Caterpillar for just a moment?  You said that Caterpillar had communicated to the White House.  Did Chairman Owens call here or did the President speak to him --
MR. GIBBS:  I think he's talked to the Secretary of Transportation, but I will look -- I'll figure that --
Q    Talked to Ray LaHood?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, I believe that's right.  Ray -- obviously Secretary LaHood was -- represented a constituent for quite some time.
Q    Right.  And will CEO Owens be going out on Air Force One?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't know if he's traveling on Air Force One.  We expect him to be there.  But I'll check on
--
Q    -- Peoria paper says he will.
MR. GIBBS:  And the Journal Star is a paper I read and believe.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Oooh --
MR. GIBBS:  Come on.  Don't get all thin-skinned now.  (Laughter.) 
Q    You just -- you made their new ad campaign.
MR. GIBBS:  I'm for it.  I'll pose for the picture.
Q    Can I check on just one more thing?  The -- on the jobs numbers -- the President last month was using the figure usually "up to 4 million" created under stimulus.  Today he used "more than 3 million" at the construction site.  Is there any significance to that?
MR. GIBBS:  I didn't -- I admit I did not watch the remarks as the President said them, but will certainly look at that.
Major.
Q    Foreign policy question, Robert.  How does the administration evaluate news from Israel about the election there?  And does it have any appraisal so far on what it might mean for the future of Envoy Mitchell's trips and negotiations?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, obviously we congratulate the Israelis on another successful election.  Obviously all of the votes have not finally been counted.  President Obama looks forward to working with whoever makes up that next Israeli government in a search for lasting and durable peace in the region.
Like our own democracy, I think whether it's turbulent or tumultuous times, or bad weather, did not seem to deter millions from voting yesterday.  I think that's the sign and strength of a strong democracy.  But until we see something more definitive, it's hard to -- hard to talk specifics, except to say that the President, as you've heard him say many times, is anxious to work with Israel and those in the region to form that lasting, endurable peace.
Q    Can I ask you about Secretary Geithner's presentation yesterday?  You said one of the things that may have driven the market reaction was the wrong impression that the government would pay in an unreasonable way an unreasonable value for certain assets.  But Secretary Geithner has said that he doesn't yet know, nor does the Treasury Department know, how to value those assets.  So how can you be sure that the government is not eventually going to pay an unreasonable way -- or an unreasonable value for assets? 
And how would you evaluate the criticism that what happened yesterday delayed an inevitable reckoning that this government and the American taxpayers are going to have to make with the financial systems that are, if not drowning, sufficiently held back by toxic assets?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, on the first question, obviously I think that's why consultations continue with the private sector and with financial institutions as we move forward on this stabilization plan.  You've all read stories, and I won't get into the technical details because, to use your water analogy, I'll be swimming in a deeper pool than I can see the bottom of.
But we've all talked and Elizabeth Warren's report makes mention of the perils of overpaying.  Look, if you overpay, from the government's side, the taxpayers lose.  If you underpay, from the bank's perspective, you create a whole series of problems there. 
I think that's why it's important that as we move forward that that collaboration continues, to ensure that a solution involving the removal of bad assets is done in a way that makes sense for banks and taxpayers, not something that maybe we could say happened in the beginning of a very complicated program.
In terms of your second question, which had to do with, I think, if I'm not mistaken, had to do with sort of what's next after this money, the President and his economic team believe that it's important to restore confidence in our government and our financial system through restoring confidence in the way this program works. 
Obviously, the taxpayers have -- in September Congress appropriated $700 billion in taxpayer money.  Half of that the Congress voted on before this President was sworn in; $350 billion obviously is a huge chunk of money.  It's important that the President and his economic team signal to all that are listening that the way that this money is going to be spent will be different than the original $350 billion was spent -- to do it in a way that's transparent, to ensure that that lending gets to the families and the businesses that need it. 
You heard the President talk -- and many hailed regulations dealing with executive -- excessive executive compensation and the activities of some banks in how they've used some of that money.  And I think --
Q    Isn't that the easier part of this equation -- that executive compensation?  It attracts a certain amount of attention, but these other tricky details are much more complicated to unravel?
MR. GIBBS:  I would agree with that because I don't make $18 million a year.  But I don't -- as I said, I think this is an enormously complicated program.  I know there is a sense of wanting to get to what's next before we get -- or what's next after what's next.  But I think it's important -- our financial team certainly believes that it's important that the money that is -- that Congress and the taxpayers have appropriated and approved is spent wisely and differently than the money that was spent before that.  Again, $350 billion is an enormous sum of money, and it's imperative that we get that spending right.
Q    Is the President confident that Hilda Solis's nomination to be Labor Secretary will get back on track?
MR. GIBBS:  He is.
Q    He is.  Is he concerned about the delays?
MR. GIBBS:  He's not.  And hopefully that process will continue through the committee today and hopefully on to the floor soon, and she'll be sworn in as the next Secretary of Labor.  The President has confidence in her ability to continue the Department's mission, and I think that that process will hopefully conclude quickly.
Q    Robert, I wanted to go back to Afghanistan.  How urgently does the --
MR. GIBBS:  -- with great trepidation.  Yes.
Q    How urgently does the President see the need -- I mean, he said that he wants to send two additional brigades.  How urgently does he see the need to get those two brigades there quickly, particularly in light of what happened in Kabul today, and the continued disarray in the country?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think what happened today underscores two things.  It underscores the security environment with which our forces and Afghanistan forces -- the environment in which they operate in.  Obviously we're reminded today of the brutal tactics that extremists like the Taliban wish to employ.  It hardens our resolve, but it also hardens our resolve to get the next steps in Afghanistan right.
To go back to the attacks for a minute, I think the -- as the President said in his inaugural address, that we will not be judged by what we tear down, but by what we build up -- I think it's obvious that the Taliban are interested only in tearing down -- but believes that a renewed coalition will be focused on building up.
Having said that, again, it's imperative that we get the review process done correctly; that we understand that, as the President has said in dealing with Iraq, there's not a -- there's not only a military solution to this problem, that we're going to have to have renewed diplomatic resources, that we're going to have to look at the way we do construction, and all of that is encompassed in the larger review.  The security situation remains dangerous, and one that this representative is focused on getting right.
Q    But you're not saying that he would wait until this review is completed before he decides on the immediate --
MR. GIBBS:  Not necessarily.  Again, I think the review encompasses more than just a military decision.  It involves any number of things, as well as dealing with Pakistan and the many issues that go along with that.
Q    Yes, Robert, one more on Secretary Geithner.  Again today he was refusing to even estimate how much more money is going to be involved.  Why is that?  Surely there must -- and I realize you guys have only been in office for a few weeks -- but surely there must be some floor that you're operating with, that you know it's going to be at least a certain amount of money.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think what's important and what he outlined yesterday was a series of what he called stress tests to underscore and to evaluate exactly what's needed.  I think you could make a fair summation that we may not entirely know all of the property lines of what we're dealing with. 
Obviously we've seen -- banks may or may not trust each other in lending from bank to bank.  And a very important process in this plan, to do so transparently but also to do so in a way that restores confidence, is to look deeply into each of these financial institutions and figure out what's on their books, what they may need in order to begin to get credit flowing again to businesses and families.  And I think that's a very important step in this process and one that shouldn't be given short shrift in order to, again, simply get to what's next after what's next.
Q    Surely there's some internal estimates that he and the others are operating with.
MR. GIBBS:  I think rather than guessing, it's important, and the financial team believes it's important, to get that right.
Yes, Ann.
Q    Robert, on stimulus, why would the President be willing to scale back the tax cut that he promised for the middle class during the campaign now that they've announced a deal up on the Hill?  What would his reason be?  Just to compromise?  Everybody has to give a little?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that the President obviously campaigned on ensuring that we put money directly back into the pockets of many middle-class families.  I think it's accurate to say -- and you could ask probably many members of the House and probably 61 -- at least 61 senators, they may -- and particularly one President -- they may have written something slightly different, but, as the President said, let's not make the perfect the enemy of what's absolutely necessary now.  This President, without having seen the details -- caveat -- this President believes strongly that we have to get a plan through Congress and to his desk so that we can get that help out to the American people.  So I think, without, again, not having seen what's in the final outlines of this, the President isn't going to let the perfect stand in the way of what he thinks has to happen right now.
Q    Will we hear from him this afternoon?
MR. GIBBS:  It's entirely possible.  Again, I'm up here a little on the high wire without knowing all the news.  (Laughter.) 
Q    What does the note say?
MR. GIBBS:  Bill says he's worried the mess is going to close before we finish briefing.  (Laughter.)  Let me go to Mara.
Q    You keep on saying that we can't get to the next step before we finish this step.  And the main question about Geithner --
MR. GIBBS:  On any number of questions.
Q    For any number of -- (laughter.)  But the questions about the Geithner plan are not so much, well, what are you going to do next; are you going to ask for more money?  But he still hasn't answered the preliminary questions:  How are you going to -- what is the plan by which you're going to take these toxic assets of banks?  And he says, you know, he doesn't want to talk about them until he's figured out the structure.  Obviously this is really, really difficult.  Do you have any sense of when you think that very crucial piece of information is going to --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I think it's -- it's something that, in collaboration with the public and the private sector, they'll continue to work through. 
The reason I answered the question about what's next is, many of you have asked.
Q    Oh, no, no, I understand that.  But yesterday the problem with Geithner was just that people were expecting some details they didn't get, not so much about --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I would -- as I said earlier, I would point out to you I think that we learned quite a bit yesterday about what the next steps are going to be.  We learned about a very comprehensive plan that will focus not just on one aspect of this but in totality.  It will do it in a transparent way.  And I won't go through all of what I said earlier.  Many of these steps -- the lending program that we're going to expand is up and running.  Some of the evaluations of financial institutions are in the process of beginning to take place.
Again, I think that if you look through much of the coverage, you'll find a lot to like about what people have said about this plan.
Q    I just have one follow-up, which is, you're right in saying that this plan shouldn't be judged by a one-day market reaction, but one of the things that is really going to affect your ability to reboot the economy is the price that people who buy our debt demand in return for investing in it.  And long-term Treasury bonds are going up.  That's going to -- that has the potential to choke off the recovery and stop mortgage rates from going down.  And I'm wondering how concerned you are about that.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think -- again, I think that's why we have to get this thing right for the long term.  Obviously there are -- as I've said, it's enormously complicated.  And within each aspect of this, there are many, many moving parts.  Look, I think Ed's question was enormously fair.  Obviously home foreclosures is something on the minds of millions of people.  And it's something that we're working through and working on.
Again, the administration takes the long view of what can we do in order to ensure the long-term economic health and economic growth of this economy.  And that's what -- that's the work that continues.
Q    Robert, on the process of the conference committee, during the campaign the website had an ethics pledge that said that Obama would work to reform congressional rules, to require all legislative sessions, including committee markups and conference committees, to be conducted in public, and that would enable the American people to hold their leaders accountable for wasteful spending.  Why wasn't this conference committee done in that way?
MR. GIBBS:  I'd have to look at what you're referring to.  I don't -- I don't know what the Congress has done.  Obviously some of that might have been enormously helpful to what we were just asked.
Q    Well, Republicans are charging -- and I think accurately so -- that a lot of the discussions were behind closed doors, that a lot of this --
MR. GIBBS:  But I think a lot of those discussions behind closed doors have involved Republicans.  They've happened behind those closed doors here; they've happened behind large wooden closed doors on Capitol Hill.
Q    What difference does it make if it's Republicans?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the question was about Republicans, so that's specifically what I'm --
Q    No, no, it's about the public's right to know and observe the process.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, I encourage you to ask many members of Congress the question that you posed to me.  I'm addressing simply the larger notion of whether or not, in your follow-up question, whether Republicans have been consulted.  I think they have, and I think many have said that they've seen and talked with the President more in this administration than they have in previous administrations.
Q    I think the question is, would the President like to see these conference meetings open, whether they're Republican --
MR. GIBBS:  The President would like to see -- and the Press Secretary would like to see the outlines of a purported agreement that has been signed off on so that I can get you appropriate reaction.
Peter.
Q    -- answer the question.  The question was on the process. 
MR. GIBBS:  I understand.  I don't have anything more than what I gave you.
Q    Robert, can you talk a little bit about the role that Rahm Emanuel and other administration officials are playing on the Hill?  What message are they conveying?  Are they talking about the size of the package, about the tone of package?
MR. GIBBS:  We're a little out of what I -- what I know coming up here.  Obviously Rahm and others on the team -- Peter Orszag, Rob Nabors, Phil Schiliro -- spent a lot of time up on Capitol Hill last night.  I have not gotten a full download on all the negotiations last night and what we have, or where we are, up to date at this point.  I think that obviously the team and the President are -- want to focus on getting something done, getting it done in a bipartisan way with leaders on both sides of Capitol Hill so we can get some help to the American people.
Hopefully we'll have a little bit more for you when I get the confines of what we're looking through.
Q    Thank you, Robert. 
Q    Will you read the note now?
MR. GIBBS:  It's -- you'd be bored by the note.
Q    Robert.
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, sir.
Q    Thank you.  First, in --
MR. GIBBS:  First?
Q    In President Kennedy's first press conference in 1961, he announced 37 questions -- he answered 37 questions in 40 minutes.  My question:  Will President Obama study this transcript?  (Laughter.)    
Q    Please?
MR. GIBBS:  Do you have a copy of it from your attendance?
Q    Ooooh!
MR. GIBBS:  Come on, wait -- 
Q    I listened to it.
MR. GIBBS:  I would have said that if anybody would have asked that question.
Q    How does the President believe --
MR. GIBBS:  How many -- 37 questions in 40 minutes?
Q    Yes.
MR. GIBBS:  You know, I can only imagine that if -- Lester, if -- I can only imagine that the next day I'm sure the embattled press secretary probably wondered -- or was asked aloud at the sheer lack of detail involved by the President's quickly running through 37 questions in just over 40 minutes on national television.  So I'm empathetic with many of those questions.
Q    How does the President believe that the First Amendment can be upheld if the so-called Fairness Doctrine is reinstated and applied only to electronic media and not to any newspapers, magazines, and wire services?
MR. GIBBS:  Les, I pledge to you to study up on the Fairness Doctrine so that one day I might give you a more fulsome answer -- even after 37 questions in 40 minutes.
Q    Thank you.
MR. GIBBS:  Thanks, guys.
Q    How is he reacting to the Iranian olive branch?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me get you something from NSC. 
Thanks, guys.
END         3:17 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 2/13/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
___________________________
For Immediate Release                  February 13, 2009
1:37 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- before I take a few questions, obviously, let me just -- you all saw the President's statement on the tragedy in Buffalo.  Secretary LaHood, obviously, has been involved in what's going on.  I spoke about an hour ago with folks at NTSB and FAA.  They have 18 people -- NTSB has 18 people on the ground investigating the situation.  And as they told us on the call, that the flight data recorder and the cockpit voice recorder, as you know, have been recovered and are back in Washington.
The President learned of the accident last night after we returned from Springfield.  So his thoughts and prayers are obviously with the families that have been affected by this.  You saw the President's statement this morning about how fragile life is, based on one of the victims being at the White House just one week ago.
So with that, let me take a few questions.  Yes, ma'am.
Q    Thank you, Robert.  I want to take just a quick look at the Gregg development yesterday.  I understand that it was his decision, the position of the White House that he was not pushed from here to make a decision in any way --
MR. GIBBS:  I think that's Gregg's position, too, to be fair to him.
Q    But just taking a look at all this broadly, obviously all the circumstances of these personnel problems have been different in each case.  But is there a sense that the White House is not thinking hard enough about each person and what the potential problems might be and how big those problems might get?  I mean, what is -- what is the thinking here about how you could do these things better, so that you don't have people drop out and cause embarrassment?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think -- well, I guess without generalizing, I think you'd have to look at many individual situations.  Taking, for instance, Senator Gregg, I think you saw President Obama's comments last night on Air Force One.  He continues to have great respect and admiration for Senator Gregg.  Clearly, he -- and I think he said this himself yesterday -- had a change of heart, a change of mind, that he's always been somebody known for independence and probably would have a hard time serving on any Cabinet.
But I guess it's hard to generalize about individual circumstances that lead people to make a decision, but then ultimately change their mind.
Q    Well, clearly, you guys don't want these developments to happen and to keep happening.  What can you do to --
MR. GIBBS:  I mean, I think the President certainly was disappointed.  But I think the President remains focused on the work that he has in front of him, which, as you guys know and as we discuss here each day, there's a lot on his plate.  But I think the progress that we've shown on our agenda I think bodes well for getting our economy moving again and bodes well for the American people.  I think ultimately the test of the American people is what are you doing to make our lives better. 
I think we're on the cusp of some big developments as it relates to that -- a nearly $800 billion recovery plan that we think will save or create 3.5 million jobs and move the economy in the right direction; a tax cut for 95 percent of working families, which the President campaigned on; doubling our renewable energy generating capacity over the course of three years, doing it in a transparent way without pet projects.  You can go on and on.
I think without sort of generalizing about individual cases, I think the -- I think people will take the long view and see that in a short period of time this administration has made great progress.  Lots of work continues and lots of challenges are ahead, but that's what the President is focused on -- not looking backward, but looking forward.
Caren.
Q    Robert, I have a question about the plan to stem mortgage foreclosures.  There are reports that you're working on a plan that would involve subsidizing distressed borrowers.  Can you comment on any of those details?  Like can you say when that plan is going to be ready?  And I also wanted to ask about the bank rescue plan.  There seems to be a belief on Wall Street that you're going to go back to the drawing board and maybe offer some more of the details that people felt weren't there in the original Geithner announcement.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me take the first part.  I should just start the week ahead, right, just at the beginning of these briefings, rather than --
Q    Sure.
MR. GIBBS:  I can -- you all seem perched at the edge of your collective seats.  The President --
Q    It's Friday.
MR. GIBBS:  Do what?
Q    It's Friday.
MR. GIBBS:  The President will travel on Wednesday.  Let me start with Tuesday.  The President will travel Tuesday to Denver to talk about the recovery plan.  That afternoon we'll travel to Phoenix, Arizona, spend the night in Arizona that night, and then on Wednesday the President will give a speech and outline a plan to stem home foreclosures.  So without getting into the details of what the President will say on Wednesday, I can tell you that that will happen next week.
In terms of the -- I'm having a little hard time understanding your question.  Obviously the administration continues to work through issues related to the financial stability package.  I don't -- that's not in -- that's not a direct relationship with Wall Street expectations.  I just -- it's just part of the process.
Q    It's not just Wall Street, though -- the lawmakers felt like the plan was short on details; you know, specifically on this public-private partnership.  A lot of people have questions about how it would work and how it will get started.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, obviously the Secretary is in Rome, dealing with the G7 and his counterparts there.  But obviously he continues to move forward to put a plan in place that will stabilize our financial system.  I mean, that certainly -- that work continues, that work was ongoing all of last week and all this week, and I assume will continue for many weeks, as this is not going to be solved overnight.  I think you've seen developments in the last only few hours relating to banks and foreclosures.  That is something the President spoke about throughout last fall.  But I don't think this is -- I think this is the continued moving forward of a policy, not necessarily in relation to particular criticism.
Yes, sir.
Q    I just wanted to give you guys an opportunity to respond to two things from yesterday involving Caterpillar.  One is the CEO of Caterpillar, after the President left the event, said that he did not think the stimulus package in and of itself would be able to enable him to rehire workers -- certainly not in the short term.  He put out a statement today saying that: the stimulus package combined with other significant stimulus packages abroad would help move the global economy towards recovery and if these packages are enacted quickly they could stimulate demand for our products, and that would likely over time provide Caterpillar the opportunity to recall employees who had been laid off -- certainly not exactly what President Obama said he had said and I wanted to know what he said to begin with.
But if you clarify that, and also --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me take a stab at that one.  I think what the President said that -- the Chairman and the CEO said if the recovery plan is passed, the company would be able to rehire some of those employees.  And as you just read, he said that "if these packages are enacted quickly, that could stimulate demand for our products that would likely over time provide Caterpillar the opportunity to recall employees that had been laid off during this downturn."  I think the statement that you just read and the statement of the President are very consistent.
Q    I don't even know how to respond to that.  It seems to me like what the President -- well, it just, I mean -- the President was clearly giving the impression -- this is before the stimulus package had passed -- that the CEO of Caterpillar, who just announced layoffs in January, said that he would be able to rehire some of those workers if this stimulus package passed -- the one stimulus package that the Senate was considering at the time.  And what the CEO of Caterpillar said today -- and again, I don't know what he said in private to anybody in your administration -- what he said today was, this one plus other ones worldwide over a period of time, that could enable them to rehire some of those workers.
MR. GIBBS:  "It would likely over time provide Caterpillar the opportunity to recall employees who have been laid off during this downturn."
Q    All right, I'm not going to belabor it.  The other thing is, Congressman Ed Schock yesterday, who President Obama urged Caterpillar employees --
MR. GIBBS:  Aaron Schock, I think.
Q    What did I say?  Oh, I'm sorry, Aaron Schock -- President Obama urged him -- Caterpillar employees to lobby him -- went to the floor of the House today and said that he had stayed around for half an hour and not one Caterpillar employee came to him and urged him to vote for the stimulus package, and, in fact, over the course of time, 1,400 Caterpillar employees have urged him to oppose the stimulus package.  And I was just wondering what you think that indicates if the President comes to a factory, heralds what this bill will do for these employees, urges them to lobby a congressman, and, according to the congressman, not one of them does so.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I haven't -- I haven't seen what the congressman said.  I think --
Q    That's exactly what he said.
MR. GIBBS:  Right.  I think that -- I think the President and the CEO have laid out the benefits of this bill, what it would do -- I think it's obvious, an infrastructure investment that is greater than any infrastructure investment since the beginning of the Interstate Highway System is going to spur demand for construction equipment and put people back to work and will have a positive benefit in East Peoria, where we were, and throughout downstate Illinois and throughout the country.
I think if the congressman goes back and evaluates the plan, lobbying or not, I think he'll see that it saves or creates millions of jobs, puts people back to work, would put people -- would put money directly into employees at Caterpillar's pockets, as well as people throughout his district.  It marks a landmark achievement in terms of renewable energy, which having spent time in Peoria and downstate Illinois is a big deal for them.  It will create -- refurbish schools and create 21st century classrooms.
I think if the congressman goes and looks at the bill through an economic lens, not just one -- not just through a political one, I think he'll see benefits not just for his district and his state, but for the entire country.
Q    I'm not questioning that, but it seems to me like there's some sort of disconnect between the President urging constituents to lobby their congressmen -- this has been one of the problems that --
MR. GIBBS:  I can't speak to -- I can't speak to what the congressman said or saw from different employees because I didn't hang out with him yesterday.  I can simply speak to the benefits that economists that aren't affiliated with this White House say the bill will do.  Maybe some of those guys should call him, too.
Yes, sir.
Q    Quickly, was the President disappointed that after his remarks yesterday the CEO came out and said he might actually lay people off first?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President is obviously, as you heard him speak, and heard him speak today, that he's always concerned about the job situation.
Q    But there just seemed to be a disconnect between what he was saying to the people and then all of a sudden --
MR. GIBBS:  Look, I think the -- I think you've heard the President enumerate many times that the economy is likely to get worse before it gets better.  Again, I think that's why today could begin a monumental step forward in getting that economy moving again.  The nearly $800 billion stimulus package will have a huge impact, we believe, on getting the economy kick-started and moving forward.
Q    Anything about Afghanistan on the week ahead that we should know about?  Are you guys going to make -- I mean, if you make a decision to deploy troops in the next day or so -- the Pentagon, your counterpart at the Pentagon today in his press briefing said that it could happen, he's still saying, this week.  He was asked specifically next week or this week; he still said this week.  Obviously today is the end of the week.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  I was going to say -- maybe I should send him my week ahead.  (Laughter.)
Q    So is there anything we should know today or tomorrow about an announcement about Afghanistan?
MR. GIBBS:  Nothing that -- nothing is on my schedule for this week.  Obviously the President and the Secretary of Defense have both said the decision is likely to come soon.  Without enumerating exactly when "soon" might arrive on one's calendar, I wouldn't dispute the notion --
Q    Do you guys have a glossary of how these timing terms work -- "soon"?  A couple of days was what the Secretary of Defense said on Tuesday.
MR. GIBBS:  Right.
Q    "A couple" is usually two, maybe three.
MR. GIBBS:  And here we are on Friday.  (Laughter.)
Q    Yes.  I mean --
MR. GIBBS:  I would tell you that the President hasn't made a decision on augmenting our force structure in Afghanistan.
Q    But if he does, he will tell the American people.
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, absolutely.  I mean, obviously --
Q    Can we definitely see that from the White House?  Would he definitely do it from the White House or --
MR. GIBBS:  I think he -- I think you'd hear the President -- you would hear the President talk about this.  I don't think there's any doubt there is -- obviously, once this happens, there are a number of things that have to happen:  You notify units, you notify families, you'll notify Congress.  I have every faith that when that decision is made, you, too, will be notified by either me or somebody who appears like me in a different capacity.  (Laughter.)
Yes, Chip.
Q    If this bill is -- if this stimulus is passed today and tonight by the Senate, why is he waiting until Monday to sign it?  And do you have any details on the signing?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think, as I understand it -- and I can make sure this is true -- I think it will physically -- to get the paperwork done and get down to receive the -- I think we're likely to receive the bill no earlier than Monday, as I understand it.  You know, I -- knock on wood -- don't want to jinx anything.  Obviously, if we receive that bill in time, to do something on either Monday or Tuesday, obviously the President believes it's a huge priority and would sign that quite quickly.
Q    So he did away with the prime time, five minute speech.
MR. GIBBS:  We're not --
Q    -- is there going to be something?  "We're not" what?
MR. GIBBS:  I think you will -- if we are fortunate enough to be able to sign a bill Monday or Tuesday, we'll have a signing ceremony and talk about the positive impacts of this legislation.  I think he'll do that as well in Denver, on Tuesday.  And I think he'll also, as he talks about this, will also talk about not just the foreclosure crisis and policy to address that also next week.
But the White House continues to work on financial stability, regulatory reform, and the other aspects of the policy that have to move forward for the President to -- as the President has said, for the economy to fully recover.
Q    Can I follow up one thought, or try Jennifer's question one more time --
MR. GIBBS:  Sure.  It's allowed.  (Laughter.)
Q    -- looking forward on the Gregg nomination.  What can you do differently to make sure this kind of thing doesn't happen again.  Does it -- does the White House Counsel's Office need to be more deeply involved?  Do they need to ask more questions?  I mean, you know, the --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I just -- I'm not entirely sure.  You guys ask questions for a living.  What might we pose that --
Q    Yes, that would be an excellent idea.  Get us involved.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  "Are you likely within a seven-day period to come to a different conclusion than the one which you're giving the President?"  (Laughter.)  You know, I don't --
Q    Well, most of us thought he might.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  I mean, I don't know -- I don't know, maybe --
Q    "Are you aware the President is a Democrat?"  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  You know, the ten best questions I'll certainly get from you all over e-mail, I'll pass on to the Counsel's Office to expand our process.
You know, again, I think that -- you know, like I said, it's hard to generalize over individual instances.  You know, I mean, there's been a lot of discussion about, even in today's papers, about what does this mean for bipartisanship; is bipartisanship dead; isn't it just futile or silly for the President to reach out to the other side of the aisle?  You know, it all seems somewhat silly to me, the arguments.
I think if you look at the four -- the almost four weeks of this administration, and even a little bit beforehand because the President had to be -- was involved in talking to senators, including working with Senator Gregg on approving the money for -- the additional $350 billion for financial stability.  That was done with Democrats and Republicans.  The legislation the President signed to ensure that if a woman works in a factory all her life and is paid less than a man, that that won't stand in a court of law in this country.  And that was done with Democrats and Republicans working together, and the President's signature.
The expansion of children's health insurance, a very successful program that will now cover an additional 4 million people, was done with bipartisan support, and the President's signature.
And I think when the dust finally settles today, whatever time that is, I think you'll see an economic recovery plan that moves forward because Democrats and Republicans worked together in order to get it to the President's desk -- something, as I've said, he'll sign quickly.  And then we'll look forward and continue to reach out to Republicans in a way that moves an agenda forward that works best for the American people.
The President is not going to -- the President is not going to stop reaching out to Republicans because one Republican he respects decided to change his mind and continue to serve and represent his state in the U.S. Senate.  The President will continue to work and reach out to folks to move the agenda of this country forward.
Mark.
Q    On a related outreach issue, is the White House doing anything to address the concerns of House Republicans who fear the White House is trying to control the Census Bureau and the 2010 census?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, as you know, and I think as they know, the census is a department -- or an entity within the Department of Commerce that will administer the census.  The Commerce Secretary will oversee that, and obviously in consultation with Congress and the White House.  The President understands the benefit of an accurate and independent census count, and I think the American people can be assured that's what they'll get.
Q    Why in consultation with the White House?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that the -- historically the White House, as well as Congress, has been involved in these issues.  But, again, the census count will be done out of the Census Bureau within the Department of Commerce.
Yes.
Q    The stimulus package includes some new limits on executive compensation that arguably go much further than the limits that you put down, and they apply to all recipients of bailout funds going forward.  Are -- is the White House concerned about these elements, and specifically are you worried that people won't come -- banks won't come forward to seek aid?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me check with NEC and the Treasury on whether they've made any conclusions based on the final language of the bill.  I don't have anything on that.  Obviously, we want to get something that ensures the -- ensures that compensation isn't excessive but also is -- I think we structured a package that allows banks to participate.  Let me check particularly on that.
Q    All right.  Since you didn't answer that one, can I -- let me try a different one.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  All right.  If I don't -- well, let's not go back and --
Q    All right.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  That might be a tough standard to meet.  (Laughter.)
Q    On Wednesday's housing announcement, should we expect more detail than we saw on the previous announcement regarding the financial --
MR. GIBBS:  Do you have a mortgage that currently exceeds the value of your home?  (Laughter.)
I will tell you that the plan that the President and his team are working on is not -- like the financial stability plan -- is not intended to be measured by one day's market score-keeping, but instead to ensure that the 10,000 Americans each day that have their homes foreclosed on, and the millions more that are barely getting by, are protected.  That's what the White House is going to do, and I think that's what the American people demand.
Q    Just an outline?  Is that what we should basically expect, or is it going to be deeper?
MR. GIBBS:  I think that travel sign up will go around for Phoenix.  It's lovely this time of year and I think you'll have a good story to write on Thursday.  I don't know if I answered your question, but I'm going to go to somebody else.  (Laughter.)
Q    Same topic, Robert.  Are you still talking about $50 billion to $100 billion for that housing --
MR. GIBBS:  Those are the numbers --
Q    -- is that still in play?
MR. GIBBS:  I think some manner of that.  Again, I don't want to get ahead of where the team is.  I don't want to get ahead of where the President is.  My admonition to you would be not dissimilar to the one I gave the other day about whether -- some things may come out that aren't in the plan, as happened extensively with the financial stability package, based on somebody's hope that it would be.  So without -- I mean, I was trying not to be too sarcastic, but I would wait until Wednesday to see what the President offers, and be careful that we don't set an unreasonable series of expectations based on leaks from God only knows where.
Q    And a follow-up to that.  Is there going to be any thought given as part of this package next Wednesday allowing judges to alter the terms of a mortgage?  Is that in the mix at all, or is that a creature of Congress?
MR. GIBBS:  That's a good question that I think we can -- we'll address Wednesday.
Q    Okay.  And did he have a comment on JPMorgan or Citigroup this morning -- their three-week --
MR. GIBBS:  I mean, I think that the President, throughout the fall, campaigned on the idea of a moratorium on foreclosures in order to ensure that a policy could be put in place to help people in the interim.  And obviously I think what they've done is consistent with what the President believes is at least part of something that would be likely seen in a housing policy that protects the American people.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, I want to go back to the issue that's been raised about jobs being created under the stimulus bill.  Is the President being overly optimistic about how many jobs will be created?  And also, what exactly is that number?  I mean, we -- I think he used yesterday 3.5 million -- I don't know if it was  this morning, 3.5 million; we've heard up to 4 million; 3 million; 3 to 4 million.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think some of that's dependent, obviously, on the size of the package that's been involved.  I think the newspapers today looked at different statistics, but you're also looking at statistics at different points in the legislative process.  We've talked about spend-out rates at different points in the legislative process.
Q    But in light of what we're hearing, these stories where -- like at Caterpillar, where they're saying, you know, we'll have to lay off more people before we can even see that benefit of rehiring some of those people -- is he being overly optimistic that these jobs can be created and created within this time period of 18 months or so?
MR. GIBBS:  No, I think the President believes that the framework and the principles that are contained in the recovery plan do what is needed to save or create 3.5 million jobs, that -- that's a number that the economic team and he feel comfortable with.
I think that's going to be done in any number of different ways.  Obviously there's going to be direct state aid that will likely help a governor not have to lay off teachers or cops.  Obviously that would be part of the bill.  I think an investment in alternative energy that will spur renewed development -- whether it's solar or wind projects or fuel projects -- I think it's likely to increase the number of people employed in those industries.
I think the President optimistic, while at the same time understanding, as he's said many times, that the economy is bad and getting worse.  As I talked about a week ago, the rate in which we've seen unemployment, over just the three months, is equal to roughly what we saw over the last -- the previous nine months.  So obviously that job loss is accelerating.
I think that's why it's important that something get through Congress and to the President quickly.  The President is confident that this is a plan that will save or create those jobs.  But obviously I don't think there's any doubt that with the simple passage of this plan, the bad news isn't going to be over.  I think that we'll -- there are going to be continued hard times, and it's going to take a while to get out of this mess because it took us a while, regrettably, to get into it.
And again -- and on that, and I've said this before, you know, we are working on the process, along with Capitol Hill, on financial regulatory reform to ensure that the conditions that allowed some of the things to happen that have us where we are now don't happen again -- the foreclosures, financial stability, the -- really all of that has to happen; that not one -- any one single thing is going to solve a series of problems, but instead a series of things will address a series of other challenges.
Q    And just to go back again to Senator Gregg, if he would not perhaps have been, you know, a good Secretary in any kind of administration, would not have been comfortable doing that, did the President sit back and say, okay, there's probably a chance this won't work but I'm going to gamble that it will?  I mean, was this a gamble that didn't pay off?
MR. GIBBS:  No, I mean, I would address, largely address the question to Senator Gregg because those were his comments, not mine or anybody else at the White House.  I mean, I think the statement that I released yesterday -- this was something that Senator Gregg wanted to do.  The President believed he would be a good addition to the Cabinet.  The senator, obviously, over the course of the past several days, changed his mind and communicated that.
But I don't -- I think there will be bumps along the road to changing the way this town works, and to work in a way that's cooperative and bipartisan.  I don't think that those bumps will end after four weeks, and may not end after several years, but the President remains committed to ensuring that he reaches out to other Democrats and Republicans to get things done.  Maybe he's just stubborn like that, but that's what he's going to continue to do.  That's really what he's always done.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, let me ask about the satellite collision.  Are there national security implications here?  This is a very popular earth orbit that has had debris spewed in it.  You've got a former NASA official calling this a catastrophic event.
MR. GIBBS:  I can get someone on the science and technology -- I think that, as I understood it, at least, that the capabilities could be taken, using the additional satellites that are already in place.  I don't think there are grave national security implications, but I will certainly check and see if there are other aspects of that that I don't have now.  I know we talked last night about the fact that you think it's a big place, but apparently it is quite crowded up there.
Yes, sir.
Q    Is the -- post-Gregg, is the President still considering Republicans for the Cabinet?  Is he considering any Republican replacements for Gregg at Commerce?
MR. GIBBS:  I haven't seen particular lists for Commerce going forward.  I don't think -- I don't know, in particular, if there are Republicans on that list.  I don't think that Senator Gregg changing his mind would preclude him from picking a Republican in the future.
Q    Okay.  And there was some concern about --
MR. GIBBS:  Wait, if I answered your question, do you get another?  (Laughter.)
Q    What's that?
MR. GIBBS:  I'm kidding.  (Laughter.)
Q    There was some concern among supporters of the President that he had chosen someone, in Gregg, who was too opposed to many of the President's views, and I wonder, does the President agree with that, or is he going to consider that as he goes forward, that maybe he was a little bit too far to the right, in making this choice?
MR. GIBBS:  Look, the President was -- you saw the President was quite comfortable with his selection.  The President and Senator Gregg had a discussion about the agenda moving forward, and obviously the agenda that's going to move forward is the President's agenda.  Whether or not -- what role that played in some of Senator Gregg's ultimate decision-making in the last few days I'll let him address.  But it won't preclude him from looking at other Republicans or other people that may disagree with certain aspects of his agenda.
I don't -- there are probably few, if any, people here that agree a hundred percent with the President, including his wife.
Yes.
Q    Given the accelerating job losses you just described, is there any concern in the administration that even whatever the size, at $787 billion, the stimulus plan may not be big enough?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think economists have certainly said that.  And you saw the President at the beginning of this discuss that economists had given out a range for a recovery plan.  The President believes that the recovery plan -- I think the original estimates of what we were talking about was a range of $675 billion to $775 billion.  So I think where this package landed, some of the composition obviously is different, but I think the range that we landed in is quite consistent with meetings that the economic team started out having.
Look, I think it remains to be seen whether the economy needs more.  I don't think there's any doubt, as I've said, that the economy is going to need a financial stability plan that moves lending forward for other banks, for small businesses, for families, and the regulation efforts that this White House is working through.  So I think the President is hopeful and optimistic that the plan that is going through Congress will be one that works for the American people and works for the economy.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, your office said last week on the census bill that -- the census, there's historic precedent for the director to work closely with White House senior management, who plan to return to that model.  The President said he wants to reevaluate the process.  Can you offer more detail for both of those statements?
MR. GIBBS:  No, I -- I mean, I think I would go back to the answer that I gave Mark, that the census is run and directed by the Census Bureau within the Department of Commerce; obviously because that will be overseen by whomever the Secretary is, and that the American people will be able to depend on an independent and accurate census count for 2010.
Q    Both of those statements, however, suggest changes.  And the Republicans have made a big deal of that.  Are they -- are they making a political fight?  Is there nothing to their arguments?  Is this just something -- an issue that they have found --
MR. GIBBS:  I can't really speak to what drives their decisions on that.  They can probably better speak for themselves than I can.
Yes, sir.
Q    Thank you, Mr. Gibbs.  Two questions, please.  One, yesterday Secretary Clinton at the State Department, she had a reception for the delegation visiting India to mark the 50th  anniversary of the Dr. Martin Luther King historic visit.  You think President Obama will make a visit to India?  Indians are waiting to welcome him.
MR. GIBBS:  It's not on my week ahead.  (Laughter.)
No, I think that it's -- the President doesn't have travel scheduled to India in the next -- certainly in the next few months.
Obviously on Thursday we're going to go to Canada.  Obviously the beginning of April -- what was --
Q    You said overseas.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Oh, did I say overseas?  Oh, sorry.
Q    Over lakes.
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, I was going to say -- (laughter.)  If you live in Chicago and look over that lake, it seems overseas.
In April, the President will make stops in Europe around both the NATO conference, secondly, and the G20, first.  So I don't -- the President has no scheduled travel yet to India.
Q    And second, as far as this package is concerned, small businesses have been losing workers and business since last year.  What do you think President has for the small business so they can hire workers again?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, obviously there are tax provisions that are involved.  I think one of the things that the President certainly campaigned on and believes will help small businesses is getting money back into the pockets of American families so that they can spend that money.  I think -- obviously consumer spending drives the vast majority of economic growth and I think that creating jobs, putting money back directly into people's pockets will certainly help drive small businesses and not only hire more people, but hopefully also through financial stability, get lending so that they can add to it and get the economy going.
Jon.
Q    I just wanted to try again on the issue of the open conference committee question.  We just didn't really resolve it the other day.  I mean, on the transition website it said explicitly that the President wanted the conference committee process to be open to the public.  In light of that, how does he feel about the conference committee process this week on the stimulus which was, even to apparently some members of the conference committee, not open?  And going forward, does he intend to fulfill that promise?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I haven't seen the particular comments.  Obviously the President hopes for greater openness and transparency in government.  Whether it's the transparency that's part of this bill or transparency that's part of conference committees, whether that transparency -- obviously there's a lot of things that he believes can be improved.  And I think that's something that we'd like to continue to see.
We talked about -- and something that we're struggling to implement that we talked about during the campaign, which was putting legislation on the web -- non-emergency legislation on the web for five days before it's signed.  The White House is struggling with trying to figure out how to do that in a way -- when do you do it, how do you do it, what do you put up.
So I think all this is a work in progress.  And as I said, it will take probably longer than a few weeks to change how this place works.
Q    Was he satisfied with the process this week?
MR. GIBBS:  Ask me that when the Senate finishes and we have something.
Q    I mean the conference --
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, I think the President is happy with the product that Democrats and Republicans put together.
Q    The process, not the product.
MR. GIBBS:  The process and the product.
Q    Robert, some White House aides participated in that conference committee process, meeting, negotiating behind closed doors, in some sense, I guess, validating that process.  I mean, could they not have been insisting upon a more open process where C-SPAN cameras come in and record that, as the President promised to do on health care negotiations?
MR. GIBBS:  Unclear if Rahm could satisfy some FCC requirements.  (Laughter.)  But I think the President is, as I said, pleased with the --
Q    Cable.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, the FX channel, unfortunately, is what we're going to do.  (Laughter.)
He's pleased with the process and the product that has come out.  And I think when the process is done, I think the American people will be proud of the product that we believe and we hope will begin to stimulate the economy, get people hired, back to work, and moving things forward, and putting people -- putting money back in their pockets.
Margaret.
Q    I have a quick follow-up on the foreclosure announcement for next week, and then an economic stimulus question.  Next week, should we expect for his remarks on foreclosure to be just one part of what will become a series of foreclosure plans?  Or should we expect it to be kind of the broad strokes, the full outlines --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me wait and we'll have more on that as we get closer to Wednesday.  But, you know, I think you'll see the President take a big step forward in dealing with the crisis that faces 10,000 people every day.
Q    My question on the economic stimulus is that, it will include some health care provisions, health information technology and comparative research effectiveness the Republicans have suggested are not just about creating jobs, but leading us toward a European health care system that would including rationing.  Do you think that's just entirely political rhetoric on their part or --
MR. GIBBS:  Yes.  (Laughter.)
Q    -- or to some extent, is -- okay, if you put the --
MR. GIBBS:  I think it's exceedingly similar to what we've heard for going on the last two decades.
Q    If we could set the buzzword of "European system" aside, to some extent --
MR. GIBBS:  Or Canada.  (Laughter.)  We're going Thursday.  (Laughter.)
Q    Is President Obama seeking -- with the economic stimulus plan, with the health care provisions -- to at least begin making policy moves while working on job creation?
MR. GIBBS:  I think we've heard a lot of concern in this process for spending.  And I think whether it is the spending that is in this bill to create jobs through alternative energy, whether that's through creating jobs to implement health care technology, whether that is creating jobs to improve schools and build 21st century classrooms and laboratories, that all of those will have a lasting impact and save the taxpayers money.
Each -- you saw the President I think do this in both town hall meetings this week.  If you go to the bank on your way home and take our your ATM card and get $25 out of your account to use this weekend, it's a transaction that costs the bank, I think in many cases, half of a penny to do.  A medical transaction, moving your records from your doctor in Bethesda to an emergency room in Washington costs $10.  The President believes that by implementing health care technology, we can save billions of dollars in health care costs that we see skyrocketing every year, that we see putting more and more businesses out of business, and is blamed repeatedly for patient safety and patient death. 
So I think that if I was for saving money, saving lives, creating jobs, providing less bureaucracy, I think I'd support an increased investment in health care technology that would likely do all those things.  We have to move our health care system into the 21st century.  If I was for saving small businesses money on their health care, I'd be for an increased investment in health care IT. 
I think many of the complaints that you've heard from different people about this bill -- if you look through the lens of particularly the health IT projects, I think many of those questions are answered for those individual critics.  Whether they like the answer is an interesting thing to ask them.
Q    Robert, the initial visit to Canada by a new President has traditionally been little more than a celebration of continental solidarity.  Does the current --
MR. GIBBS:  Oh, that's -- I was going to read that for Thursday.  (Laughter.)
Q    Does the current economic crisis and the job situation and the linkage of the two economies elevate this at all over the boiler plate, or make it anything more than these visits usually are?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that -- we'll have a longer briefing for you on the Canada trip, but I think there are any number of topics -- obviously the economy will be the most primary -- the primary topic that you hear discussed.  I think you'll hear -- obviously trade will be a part of that discussion.  Obviously I'd put that under the economic umbrella.  Obviously I think security, international security will come up.  I think you'll hear a discussion on energy, as the President talked about when meeting with regional reporters earlier in the week.
So I think -- I think the agenda, which we'll have more on, will be robust and include any number of topics ranging from economic security to international security.
Q    Week ahead?
Q    Can I follow on that?
MR. GIBBS:  You want to do the week ahead?
Q    And on the plane crash, please?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, go ahead.
Q    Thank you.  On this tragic plane crash, is there any consideration on the part of the government to giving greater warning to the flying public not to get on a plane if it's excessively windy or icy or snow -- (inaudible) situation?
MR. GIBBS:  I would -- as it -- I mean, I think if you -- I would direct that to FAA and NTSB -- particularly FAA.  I think they've got stuff on their website particularly about that.
Q    Can I try one on the stimulus bill?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me go back to -- let me just do this quickly, the draft week ahead.  I've got to get on a plane not too long from now.
Q    Will you celebrate Valentine's?
MR. GIBBS:  In Chicago, I'm celebrating Valentine's.
The President and the First Family will fly to Chicago this evening and return to Washington on Monday afternoon.  There are no public events scheduled for this weekend.  The President will attend meetings at the White House on Monday afternoon when he returns. 
As I mentioned earlier, on Tuesday the President will travel to Denver, Colorado, where we'll hold an event on the economic recovery plan.  We'll travel then to Phoenix that evening --
Q    And is it a town hall or -- town hall?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't believe it's a town hall.  Travel to Phoenix that evening -- we'll stay overnight there -- and talk about home foreclosures Wednesday morning in Phoenix.  He'll return that evening to Washington.
On Thursday, to celebrate continental brotherhood, the President will travel to Ottawa, Canada, meet with Prime Minister Harper and other Canadian officials before returning to Washington that night.  The President will have meetings in Washington next Friday.  And I do not have anything beyond that or guidance for what next weekend looks like.
But I hope you guys have a good weekend.
Q    --background on Thursday --
Q    Yes, background briefing, Canada?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, yes, we will --
Q    Can we have it on the record?  When is --
MR. GIBBS:  I'm going to answer the on-the-record question versus background -- why would we take up the first two minutes of -- why would we not take up the first two minutes of that without a discussion on that?
Q    When will the briefing be, though?
MR. GIBBS:  We will send that out to you a little bit later this afternoon.
Q    What about on housing --
Q    On housing --
Q    Will we get a similar background --
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, yes.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Will the briefing be there or here?
MR. GIBBS:  The briefing on housing will likely be --
Q    Not a background briefing.  On-the-record briefing. 
Q    On-the-record briefing.
Q    Vote:  246/183, one present, not a single Republican vote in the House.
MR. GIBBS:  3.5 million jobs that we look forward to saving or creating through the implementation of a robust recovery and reinvestment plan.  Have a good weekend. 
Q    Is the briefing --
MR. GIBBS:  Probably happen there.
END           2:27 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 2/17/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
______________________________________________
For Immediate Release                           February 17, 2009
Press Briefing
On the Trip of the President to Canada
By
Denis Mcdonough, Deputy National
Security Advisor for Strategic Communication
Via Teleconference
3:54 P.M. EST
MR. BURTON:  Hi, there.  Thank you all for joining the call.  I'm the Deputy Press Secretary.  Denis is going to give a statement here and then we will take as many questions as time will allow.  And if you have any follow-up I can be reached by email at wburton@who.eop.gov.
And now here is Denis McDonough.
MR. McDONOUGH:  Thanks a lot, Bill, and thanks everybody for joining this afternoon.
On Thursday morning President Obama will fly to Ottawa on his first foreign visit as President.  He will depart Andrews and arrive Ottawa International Airport, where he will be greeted by the Governor General of Canada and His Excellency Jean-Daniel Lafond.  As you all know, the Governor General Michaelle Jean is the Queen's representative in Canada.
After the welcome and meeting at the airport, the President will proceed to Parliament Hill, in Ottawa, where he'll meet with the Prime Minister, Stephen Harper.  And after the meeting with the Prime Minister will proceed to a working lunch with the Prime Minister and several of his ministers.
The President will be joined in that lunch with members of his official delegation, which will include General Jim Jones, the President's National Security Advisor; Dr. Larry Summers, the Chairman of the National Economic Council; Carole Browner, who is the Energy and Climate Coordinator in the White House; John Brennan, who is the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism matters; and Deputy Secretary of State Jim Steinberg; as well as White House spokesman, Robert Gibbs.
After the lunch there will be a joint press availability in the Reading Room with the President and the Prime Minister.  And upon the conclusion of the press availability they will proceed back to the Ottawa International Airport where there will be a meeting with Opposition Party Leader Michael Ignatieff  And then we'll have a greeting with U.S. Embassy personnel and then return from Ottawa International to Andrews.
The President is very eager to make the trip to Canada.  He was both touched and honored that he was invited to Canada by Prime Minister Harper.  He looks very much forward to it.  He obviously recognizes that there is no larger trading partner or important economic partner for the United States than Canada.  And that will be one of the principle issues or the primary issue that they'll discuss on Thursday, namely the economy.
There will be a lot of discussion of the economic recovery plan that the President is signing today, and the synergies of that plan with the stimulus package that Prime Minister Harper has proposed in Canada, as obviously both of them have infrastructure investment in clean and renewable energy and green jobs and tax cuts for working families.
They'll also obviously be discussing, given the fact that Canada is the largest energy provider to the United States, our shared interest in energy and the environment, significant discussion of cooperation on clean energy technology.  And the President is hopeful that they can -- that he'll be able to build on the very productive conversation he had with President Calderón of Mexico last month here in Washington, before he was sworn in, wherein he and President Calderón talked about possibilities for carbon abatement, clean energy technology, and a partnership among the three North American countries on those issues.
And then of course the last set of issues they'll discuss relate to the global security challenges that we jointly face -- one, of course, being Afghanistan.  I think you may have all seen some reporting already on an interview the President gave earlier today on that matter.  He'll also obviously want to discuss upcoming summits, including the NATO summit next month and, of course, the Summit of the Americas shortly thereafter.
Canada continues to be a leader in the hemisphere, having dedicated a lot of resources to Haiti and throughout that region, having appointed an envoy for the region and having over the years been a real leader for democratization throughout the hemisphere.
So as I said, the President looks very much forward to the visit.  I think he has expressed his hope to Prime Minister Harper that this will be an opportunity for them to deepen their personal relationship, as well as their working relationship, between two vitally important friends and allies.
With that I'll stop my opening remarks and look forward to your questions.
Q    Hello, Denis and Bill.  One quick question, just to confirm, this is the first -- President Obama's first face-to-face meeting as President with another foreign leader, right?
MR. McDONOUGH:  That is --
MR. BURTON:  As President, but during the transition there was the meeting with Mexican President.
Q    Yes.  And can you please just speak a little bit more, elaborate on the import of Larry Summers and Carole Browner being a part of the delegation?
MR. McDONOUGH:  Well, you know, the President is obviously, as I said, eager to develop a close, personal working relationship with the Prime Minister.  But he also wanted to have some of his key White House staff join the delegation.  Obviously, the White House staff are closely coordinating with their agencies here in Washington.
But given the strong importance of the economic recovery plan and the investments that the President and Congress have called for in that plan, he thought it would be very important to have Larry along on the delegation to make sure that there is an opportunity to, as I said before, look at the synergies and the opportunities in these two packages, both Canadian package and the President's economic recovery plan.
Obviously trade, as I mentioned before, is a piece of that; it's a $1.5 billion trading relationship back and forth every day.  And of course as I mentioned with Dr. Browner that given the simple fact that Canada is our largest energy supplier, and given the fact that we share, obviously, a lot of environmental concerns and a lot of geography, and obviously given that we want to begin to prepare for the global efforts that will be undertaken over the course of this year, we wanted to make sure that we hit the ground running with a very important neighbor and ally.
Q    Thank you.
Q    Hey, Denis.  Hey, Bill.  I just had a few questions on trade.  Is President Obama going to do anything to begin renegotiating NAFTA in this meeting?  The Canadian Broadcasting interview suggests that that's been set a time -- aside for the time being and that President Obama says there are a lot of sensitivities right now because of the huge decline in world trade.  Has that goal been set aside for the time being, or is there actually going to be something on that?
And secondly, the Canadians have been, you know, taking some umbrage at the "Buy American" provisions in the stimulus package, even though they were tamped down slightly with the provision that they not violate international law or international agreements to the United States.  Is there anything that President Obama is going to be able to offer them to kind of tamp down their concerns on that?
MR. McDONOUGH:  Mike, thanks for the question and thanks for getting on the call; it's good to hear your voice.
I would just say a couple things.  I think just the most important point I think was the last one you made, namely that particularly at a moment of such global economic and financial tumult I think the President said today, and I'm sure you'll all see it tonight, that one of the lessons from history is to avoid any signals that suggest that we were -- that anybody is engaging in practices that may further result -- result in further decline of international trade.  I think the numbers that we've all seen already are significant enough.
In terms of what the President has to offer on trade, I think he wants to underscore the importance of what is already a very robust trading relationship, as I mentioned at one point $5 million in two-way trade every day.  It's the largest trading relationship in the world and he wants to look for ways to grow on that as it relates to new entrepreneurial and innovative technologies on energy and green technology.
And then as it relates to the Buy America provision, I think the President has been very clearly on the record on this, that the provision is obviously going to be implemented consistent with our international trade obligations, with our WTO obligations, and with our NAFTA obligations.  So I think my sense is that after hearing from him directly, there will be no need to take umbrage or to be uneasy, but rather to recognize that this is a real partner in making sure that we have our working families across this country getting back to work.  And that's the President's goal.
As it relates to NAFTA, I think you're very familiar with his views, that the labor and environmental standards that are side agreements in the NAFTA agreement are -- and many other agreements central to or a fundamental part of those trade agreements -- I think his view has been that he would like to work with our Canadian and Mexican friends to help them understand why his position makes good sense.  And I think this visit, like the discussion with President Calderón last month, will be an opportunity to do that.
MR. BURTON:  Does that answer your question?
Q    Just -- is he going to make any effort to press for that in this -- in this?  It sounds like you're saying, yes, he will try to at least ask the Canadian Prime Minister to go along with the changes in the NAFTA agreement he would seek?
MR. McDONOUGH:  Again, I just think that what I was saying, Mike, is that he, obviously, given the delicate state of the global economy, wants to make clear to Prime Minister Harper and to all of our trading partners that this is no time to -- for anybody to give the impression that somehow we are interested in less rather than more trade, and that's what -- that's the message that he'll underscore.
Q    Hey, guys.  I have a question, just first about Afghanistan.  What is the kind of -- Denis, you briefly mentioned Afghanistan as being on the agenda.  What is his message?  Will he even go down the road of asking them to reconsider pulling out of Afghanistan in a few years?
And then just second, just a follow-up on NAFTA.  By saying it's not the time to do anything that could hurt trade, are you saying that he is -- that's just not something he's going to even, you know, go down that road at all until that economy is back on track, so that's essentially on hold right now, that concept of him renegotiating a trade agreement?
MR. McDONOUGH:  Thanks, Carrie.  As it relates to Afghanistan, part of the message is going to be one of appreciation for the efforts that our Canadian allies have undertaken in Afghanistan.  Afghanistan is the largest recipient of Canadian foreign assistance.  Canada has had troops on the ground in Afghanistan alongside American forces since day one in this important mission.  And they have lost 108 Canadian soldiers in this effort.  And so Canada, like this country, has made a big sacrifice as it relates to stability and security in Afghanistan.  So the first message the President will convey is one of appreciation.
As it relates to going forward, the President will make clear that we are engaged in a comprehensive review, a comprehensive strategic review.  It's his belief that it's not -- there's not a military solution alone to Afghanistan, but that it will require all elements of our national power, all elements of our friends' and allies' national power to ensure that we have an opportunity to have stability and security in both Afghanistan and Pakistan.
So I think he looks forward to having that discussion with the Prime Minister and with the Prime Minister's team.  And my sense is that it will be just the start of a discussion on these matters as we undertake this important strategic review over the next month and a half or so.
And as it relates to NAFTA, I think, again, the President's position is well known to you, Carrie.  I mean, you've been covering him now for some time.  But in terms of, you know, the opportunity this week is that I think the President will just underscore his belief that these are important matters, labor and environmental standards are important matters, and that he'll look forward to working both with Mexico and with Canada to try to underscore his view on these -- on these two important issues.
Q    Hi, gentlemen.  Thanks for arranging this call.  My question is regard to the Alberta oil sands.  What's the White House's position on the -- on the oil sands, particularly since these imports are -- they're only going to increase in the coming years as work on climate change goes on in both countries and internationally?
And then, second, what sorts of agreements or commitments to work, however small, do you want to get out of this meeting on a North American climate treaty or carbon cap that's been raised by Canadian Environmental Minister Jim Prentice in the recent days?
MR. McDONOUGH:  Yes, well, Alexander, thanks for the question.  A couple things as it relates to -- I think that the President would hope to be able to make some progress on cooperative energy technologies, building on some of the success that we've had on some experiment -- experimental or test-level capabilities on things like carbon capture and sequestration.  I'm sure you're aware that the economic recovery package includes about $3.5 billion for CCS, and it's the kind of innovative technology, I think, that we're all going to have to get our hands around if we're going to make the kind of progress that we all believe we need to on climate and to meet the President's goal that he laid out in the campaign and as reiterated as President-elect and then as President to see the kind of reductions in carbon output, carbon emissions, that are going to be necessary to stave off some of the worst impacts of climate change.
As it relates to tar -- as it relates to the oil sands, the President is obviously aware of the concerns that have been expressed about -- about that resource.  He obviously, as I mentioned at the beginning, considers Canada a very valuable partner as it relates to energy and energy security.  And that's why part of what they're going to be discussing on Thursday is the kind of clean energy technology like is called for in terms of the investments in the Canadian package, in the recovery package, in the President's economic recovery package, things like carbon capture and sequestration, that will allow us to access abundant resources, including coal in this country.  And that's the -- that's the kind of concrete steps that he'll want to take.
But he also wants to see if there's some opportunity to build on what he discussed with President Calderón -- namely opportunities among the three countries to look for carbon abatement options or carbon abatement targets.  President Calderón laid out a pretty ambitious vision of 50 percent reduction of carbon emissions by 2050.  And that's in, you know, an economy in Mexico that continues to be developing.
And so what the President believes is that with appropriate  science and cooperative technology among the three countries, we can find new and innovative opportunities to advance an innovative agenda that will allow not just the United States but our two neighbors to be real leaders on green energy, low carbon energy opportunities here as we push ahead on the important agenda of climate change and carbon emission reduction.
Q    Hi, gentleman, I'm new in Washington, and thanks for letting me in on this call.  I wanted to ask -- I've been to a number of briefings relating to this visit, and I guess not surprisingly there's an exceptional amount of interest from journalists around the world.  And given the fact that this is the President's first visit outside of the country; is that something you're mindful of?  And can you talk a little bit about whether you see the trip to Ottawa as a sort of platform beyond speaking just to Canadians?  Will you be -- will the President be sending any kind of message globally?
And additionally, there's a lot of consternation today, as of course there is in the U.S., about the state of the auto sector.  And I'm wondering if auto issues are going to be climbing higher on the agenda given the state of play today?
MR. McDONOUGH:  Well, on the autos, that question -- and welcome to Washington, by the way.
Q    Thank you.
MR. McDONOUGH:  As it relates to autos, obviously, the news today, but also I think the news that the President -- and the stories the President heard over the course of the last several months, if not years, as he traveled this country and heard from auto workers about the challenges that they're facing -- this has been a big priority issue for him, and will maintain -- will continue to be as such.
And obviously given the integrated nature of the North American auto industry, the President will be discussing this in Ottawa with Prime Minister Harper and looking for opportunities to ensure that we have a vibrant auto sector here.
As it relates to the message that the President wants to send the world with this trip, I mean, I think the fact of the matter is the President believes that every day is an opportunity for the United States to send a clear message to the world.
That's why I think he invested as much time as he did, and as much effort as he did in trying to ensure that we sent a clear signal to the rest of the world that the United States was leading on this economic recovery package, that we're trying to dramatically expand demand at a difficult time in the economy.  That's I think why he made very clear right out of the box that he wanted to play a leadership role as it relates to the Middle East; in his first day in the Oval Office, picking up the phone and engaging leaders in the Middle -- in Israel, among the Palestinian Authority, and Egypt, and Jordan, and in Saudi Arabia -- making clear that we wanted to be actively involved in efforts to consolidate the cease-fire there, and now building on a cease-fire to ensure that we have the kind of peace and security that everybody in that region so eagerly wants.
And so there's no question that the trip itself offers a new -- an opportunity to do just that.  And I think one of the things the President will be underscoring is similar to what Secretary Clinton is underscoring on her trip, which is that it's vitally important that America revitalize its alliances, look for opportunities to use those alliances to advance our shared goals and our shared interests -- be that on global challenges like Afghanistan, or democracy throughout the hemisphere, or concrete and aggressive efforts to stem global climate change.
I think that the President sees this opportunity to head up to Ottawa as a good opportunity to do just that.
MR. BURTON:  Well, thank you all for joining the call.  As I said at the beginning, this is Bill Burton.  And if you have any questions, you can feel free to shoot me an email at wburton@who.eop.gov.  And thanks again.
MR. McDONOUGH:  Thanks, everybody.
END                   4:19 P.M. EST
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 2/20/2009
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                  February 20, 2009
PRESS BRIEFING BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:50 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS: I don't have any announcements. Obviously we'll have a week ahead if through the process of playing Jeopardy with you guys doesn't give everything out before we do that. I'll start with you, Ms. Loven.
Q Thanks. I would like to ask about the markets. How concerned are you all at how they're reacting to what's being done this week and the afternoon markets? And is the President doing anything, does he have anything different on his schedule or his agenda because of it?
MR. GIBBS: Well, obviously he met with a fairly big group of advisors to have his Presidential Daily Briefing on the economy. And the economic situation certainly continues to be at the forefront of his actions. But as I've said a couple -- more than a couple of times, actually, up here, which is I think it is unwise to believe that either everything we do is designed to cause an immediate market reaction or that the score should be kept by that.
I think that if you look at the news of the week I think the market probably prices in not just -- probably prices in a lot of information whether it's price increases, whether it's I think a lot of news throughout the globe about a deteriorating economy. I think it's more likely that what you're seeing is what the President continues to talk about, some of our greatest challenges, but certainly not just a reaction to what we're doing.
Q Well, let me just ask it in a different way. I understand what you're saying about not wanting to sort of have a daily scorecard that's only kept by what Wall Street does. But at some point you want that to take -- as well as other indicators and for the economy to turn around. What is the President being told by his advisors about when there might be some sort of turning point on some level or another, whether it's markets or somewhere else?
MR. GIBBS: Well, again, as I've said before, I think we all recognize and I think forecasters recognize that the downturn in the economy is very serious, very analogous to some of the past deep recessions that we've seen, and that it's going to take some time to get out of that hole. The question is whether that hole gets deeper or how much deeper that hole might get.
We believe -- obviously, the President signed into law the Recovery and Reinvestment Plan, which was a good first step in cushioning the blow of the recession and working aggressively to put people back to work. But I've also said from up here any number of times there's not just one thing that we need to or can focus on. You've got financial stability, you've got home foreclosures, you've got reregulation. There's any number of things that the President continues to work on that have to be solved, and it's going to take quite some time to do it.
When that turnaround happens, it's hard for me to say. The President and his team believe that the actions that we're taking now will have a direct impact on making that happen quicker. The investments that we make, that you saw the President sign into law earlier this week, we think will have an impact -- a home foreclosure plan that will stem the rising tide and spread of home foreclosures, which is tremendously important; and then obviously working on both financial stability and regulatory reform to ensure that this doesn't happen again.
But we've got -- I think the President would be frank and forthright in telling you that we've got a long way to go. He's certainly said that and that's what he's going to continue to work on.
Q Bank of America and Citigroup shares are being pummeled today on Wall Street because of fears they're going to be nationalized. Can you assure people that that step is not going to be taken and be avoided? And also, separately, on the automakers, you've had a couple of days to review their plans. Is there any early read you can give, and can you talk about the meeting at Treasury today?
MR. GIBBS: I believe the meeting is over at Treasury, and I will attempt to get something for you all on that, based on that ending -- and we've talked a little bit about that this week.
Let me reassure as best I can on your first question on banks, this administration continues to strongly believe that a privately-held banking system is the correct way to go, ensuring that they are regulated sufficiently by this government. That's been our belief for quite some time and we continue to have that.
Q Robert, the President this morning spoke to the mayors about accountability, making sure you're spending taxpayer money wisely, it's getting to the people who need it. He's also spoken out about corporate leaders taking corporate jets and spending money unwisely. Does he have similar concerns about lawmakers in Congress, since they're off this week, flying around? A lot of stories about Speaker Pelosi in Italy and several other countries; Republican lawmakers flying around the world, as well. Should the Congress, at a time of crisis, be cutting back, as well, and not flying around the world on Air Force jets?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I mean, let me split your question a little bit. I'll address the -- I mean, obviously I think members of Congress going overseas on important trips is something that the President did when he was a senator, going several times with -- or once with Senator Lugar and a longer trip to Africa because of the importance of it -- the continent played in our security concerns. So obviously I think they are -- many of those trips are important.
I think what you saw the President do today was reiterate what we have said throughout this process, which is -- and there were stories about this even today -- that we have -- we've been entrusted with the taxpayer money and appropriate it in a way in which the President and his team, and Democrats and Republicans, think will best move this economy forward.
We understand that that level of trust is extraordinary, and that whether this money goes to the states through a formula grant, whether it goes to the states or local entities through a transportation grant or something like that, that great care has to be used when dealing with the taxpayer money. The money should not be spent on wasteful projects or pet projects, but instead spent on projects that we know can and will move this economy forward.
Let me -- you didn't ask me this, but I'll add it anyway. It has been amusing this week to read the many press releases and Twitter comments on those that found the stimulus on C-SPAN during the vote something that they didn't necessarily think was a good idea until it came time to break ground on projects in their home district.
Q Are you talking about Republican lawmakers, specifically?
MR. GIBBS: Many of them, yes.
Q So does the President believe there's some hypocrisy going on?
MR. GIBBS: As I've said before, old habits are hard to break. And I think that the American people readily understand when this town gets dominated by games-playing rather than problem-solving.
Q Let me follow up. The first week in office the President signed the executive order to close down the military prison camp at Guantanamo Bay. The Attorney General is going on Monday for the first time to get a close look at it. This is a very serious issue. The American people want to know about where are these detainees going to go. And my understanding is the Attorney General is not bringing any media, it's completely closed press. How does that square with the President's vows that we've talked about on transparency? When the American people are wondering how is this policy going to be implemented, the chief law enforcement officer is basically operating in secrecy.
MR. GIBBS: I don't think the chief law enforcement officer is operating in secrecy --
Q Well, why isn't he bringing in a camera?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think what this administration is working to do, per the executive order, is to come up with a plan that ensures our security and does so in a way that meets the test of our values and protecting the men and women that keep this country free and safe. I don't think you have to do all of that through a photo op. I think this is a working trip; that this is -- a very serious number of decisions lay in front of this government, and it's important for -- whether it's the counsel here or the Attorney General or any other member of this administration working to find some of those very tough solutions -- to be able to do so not as a photo op, but as something that's --
Q Well, the question is -- it doesn't have to be a photo op if he doesn't want it to be a photo op. If he wants it to be substantive, why not let the American people in on these deliberations?
MR. GIBBS: Well, we are letting the American people in on these deliberations. That's why there's a review process that's -- that's ongoing. I think the Attorney General feels comfortable that he can make those decisions without cable.
Jake.
Q A quick follow-up on Ed's question on the trip to Guantanamo. Can you just give us any sort of timeline for the decision about Guantanamo? You have Greg Craig there now, Eric Holder going down there next week. Is there any sort of timeline you have for the decision and when --
MR. GIBBS: I thought the -- I'll go back and check the executive order. I thought the whole process was 180 days, but I will -- I'll go back and --
Q This is on the 180th day, an announcement will be made?
MR. GIBBS: No, no, no -- I assume when they get done and have made those decisions. I think obviously we're in probably the 20-some-odd day. So I don't expect -- I don't -- certainly don't have any announcements today, but as we obviously get closer and make those determinations, we'll have them for you.
Q And we did -- we interviewed Gavin Newsom, the mayor of San Francisco, after his meeting. We were talking about the report, the "ready to go" report that the U.S. Conference of Mayors had put out. And Mayor Newsom said, "What came out of the U.S. Conference of Mayors was easily mocked -- not all of it -- but just enough that it put the whole stimulus in peril, for a moment at least." I noticed in the stimulus package it says that money cannot be spent on things like golf courses, casinos, even parks. And I'm wondering, how did the President receive that U.S. Conference of Mayors report? And did that play any role in his threat to the mayors today that if they don't spend the taxpayers' money wisely, he will call them out publicly?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think -- I honestly don't know what his reaction was when he saw the initial report. I know he's met with the mayors on several occasions. But, you know, Jake, he'll have the very same message for the governors on Monday. He has the same message for -- as you saw in the remarks, for the agencies that have to implement these spending programs, and that is that these -- if you're seeking to simply fund a personal agenda at the expense of creating jobs and using taxpayer money to do it, the President will call that out and stop it. That's true for agencies and members of this administration; that's true for governors; that's true for mayors; that's true for anybody that might take part in any amount of this funding.
The President, throughout this process, has talked about the need for strict accountability to ensure that the precious resources that the American people have entrusted in this government are spent completely aboveboard and wisely. So I don't think you should look at the message that he delivered today as a one-time message. We'll have more announcements on this next week, and we'll have more dialogue like this next week, whether it's governors or whether it's people within this administration that are entrusted to handle this money.
Q On the foreclosure plan, aside from Rush Limbaugh and that cable rant on the floor of the Exchange, there really does appear to be some --
MR. GIBBS: Chuck's network? (Laughter.)
Q -- there really does appear to be some anger out there from people who just don't believe the President when he said that only people who acted responsibly are going to be helped here. How can you assure people that you're going to reward only people, only homeowners who acted responsibly?
MR. GIBBS: Well, let's go through this, because I do think this is very important. And I've watched Mr. Santelli on cable the past 24 hours or so. I'm not entirely sure where Mr. Santelli lives, or in what house he lives, but the American people are struggling every day to meet their mortgage, stay in their job, pay their bills, to send their kids to school, and to hope that they don't get sick or that somebody they care for gets sick and sends them into bankruptcy.
I think we said a few months ago the adage that if it was good for a derivatives trader that it was good for Main Street. I think the verdict is in on that.
Here's what this plan will do: For the very first time, this plan helps those who have acted responsibly, played by the rules, and made their mortgage payments. This will help people who aren't in trouble yet keep from getting in trouble. You can't stay in this program unless you continue to make mortgage payments. That's important for Mr. Santelli and millions of Americans to understand.
Here's what this plan won't do: It won't help somebody trying to flip a house. It won't bail out an investor looking to make a quick buck. It won't help speculators that were betting on a risky market. And it is not going to help a lender who knowingly made a bad loan. And it is not going to help -- as the President said in Phoenix, it is not going to help somebody who has long ago known they were in a house they couldn't afford. That's why the President was very clear in saying this was not going to stop every person's home from being foreclosed.
But Mr. Santelli has argued, I think quite wrongly, that this plan won't help everyone. This plan will help, by the money that's invested in Freddie and Fannie -- will drive down mortgage rates for millions of Americans.
The President in his speech was very clear in saying that every American with a mortgage payment should call their lender and see if they can refinance right now. This plan helps people that have been playing by the rules but can't get refinancing, get that refinancing so their home doesn't become foreclosed on.
And Mr. Santelli might also know that if you live in a home that's near one that's been foreclosed, your home value has likely dropped about 9 percent, which for the average home is about $20,000.
Now, every day when I come out here, I spend a little time reading, studying on the issues, asking people who are smarter than I am questions about those issues. I would encourage him to read the President's plan and understand that it will help millions of people, many of whom he knows. I'd be more than happy to have him come here and read it. I'd be happy to buy him a cup of coffee -- decaf. (Laughter.)
Chuck.
Q I want to sort of follow up on the criticism that --
MR. GIBBS: Let me do this, too. This is a copy of the President's home affordability plan. It's available on the White House web site, and I would encourage him: download it, hit print, and begin to read it.
Q The criticism that's coming on the housing plan is similar to the criticism that came on the bank bailout vote before you came into office and in Phase II, which is there are people who were irresponsible who will be helped -- period. It's going -- that is a fact, that is going to be -- that is going to be -- people are going to use that to say this is not fair. So what do you -- how do you -- you know, how do you justify that? I mean, how do you --
MR. GIBBS: Well, look, there is -- there will be people that made bad decisions that, in some ways, will get help. This plan, though, I think it's important for the American people to understand, was designed to help those that have been responsible.
As the President has said, if your neighbor's house is on fire or if several houses are on fire, you don't debate it; you get a hose and try to put the fire out. That's what's most important. This plan will stop the spread of those foreclosures because it addresses those that are -- that potentially could be in trouble but aren't there yet, get the help they need so that the foreclosure sign doesn't go up on their front yard.
But I also think it's tremendously important that for people who rant on cable television to be responsible and understand what it is they're talking about. I feel assured that Mr. Santelli doesn't know what he's talking about.
Q On the -- going to Jennifer's question on the markets, the markets are the ultimate confidence indicator, in many ways, right? You have said before you're not going to pay attention to day-to-day movements in the markets. However, we might hit a 12-year low by the end of today. And it's -- what is it -- is it the President's responsibility to help create some confidence in the markets?
MR. GIBBS: Oh, absolutely. I don't think that -- I mean, I think the President would agree with that wholeheartedly. But again, I think --
Q So this is not -- aren't the markets saying they don't have confidence?
MR. GIBBS: Well, again, I think the -- I think -- obviously I'm not on Wall Street, but I think it is not -- I think it is very safe to assume that what is being priced into the day-to-day fluctuations of the market is not just what happens or is announced at the White House or on the road by the White House. You know, again, you know, without going through it, I think you can look at economic news that built up over the past weekend, that we've seen and read about globally, in Europe, in Eastern Europe, in particular, that the economy is deteriorating, in some places more rapidly than might have first been imagined.
Q Are you guys considering pulling some triggers here in the government --
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the President --
Q -- that could give even an artificial boost?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I used this example the other day on the plane, and it's helpful -- it's not -- I want to go back and try to more fully answer the question. But understand that, you know, the day that the TARP funding passed, the market went up a thousand points, right? I don't think we'd all together look back and think that was the greatest thing we ever did for financial stability, right?
So I think when you -- but, leaving aside that example, I do think that the -- that this administration is working -- whether it's in foreclosures, stability, recovery -- to do that. I think without, again, divining what it is the market is doing or why it is making those decisions, I think that it -- we have to do more and the President understands that. I think he'll begin to talk more about that. He did some today, he'll do some tomorrow, and certainly next week leading into the address, to discuss the number of things that we have that are challenges that we face.
Again, you know, it would be nice to be able to just deal with one, get a recovery plan passed, and work on that, but there are probably three or four parallel tracks that have to -- that have to be followed up simultaneously, which is challenging.
Jonathan.
Q Next week the budget comes out, and it's coming out amid what looks like will probably be the longest recession since World War II. How has the economic crisis impacted the President's ability to do some of the things that he promised to do on the campaign trail? And can you say right now that there will be no tax increases in 2010?
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me do this. Let me -- we'll have more to say on the budget soon, and I'm not going to get ahead of what the President will say on Tuesday or what is ultimately contained in the budget on -- I think will be released on Thursday.
I will say this, and I think this is apparent in any number of things, that the President strongly believes that as we have spent money in the short term for the recovery plan, that we have an unsustainable path long term in our budgets.
Some of the actions that we are going to take that are out there are some honesty in budgeting, that give people a fuller picture of what's going on -- putting the -- some of the war spending back on budget; putting some disaster spending back on budget; and understanding that what that will show you on Thursday is a deficit far bigger and far redder than what might have first been imagined, because for many years we've used tricks and gimmicks to mask the size of our irresponsibility.
But I think what you'll hear from the President on Tuesday is a discussion about the decisions that we are going to have to make collectively to get ourselves back on a path toward some sustainable fiscal track.
Q And I asked you last night and you didn't have an answer -- what does the President want to get out of this fiscal responsibility summit?
MR. GIBBS: I've got a little bit on that in the week ahead, so let me wait on that one.
Yes, sir.
Q Back on the bank nationalization question. It sounded to me by your answer that you weren't quite ruling it out, you were just saying that the President strongly prefers not to do it. Is that correct?
MR. GIBBS: No, no, no. Let me be clear: The President believes that the bank -- a privately held banking system regulated by the government is what this country should have.
Q "Should have," but does that mean he will not nationalize banks?
MR. GIBBS: It's hard for me to be clearer than where I just was.
Q Okay. And also, does the President agree with a statement by Attorney General Holder the other day that on things racial, we are essentially a nation of cowards?
MR. GIBBS: I have not talked to the President about that. I think what the Attorney General discussed was -- or talked about was that for many years in this country all races have struggled with discussions about race. I would point you to the President's speech on the topic during the campaign as his thoughts on that matter.
Q And, Robert, you said you could never be -- you couldn't be clearer than that. You could say he will never nationalize a bank; that would be clearer. Can you say that?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think I was very clear about the system that this country has and will continue to have.
Q Robert.
MR. GIBBS: Yes.
Q Back to the auto talks. The President didn't attend the session today, as I understand it.
MR. GIBBS: He did not.
Q Will he be attending future sessions? And what's the road map for the next Auto Task Force meeting? Will they meet a couple times a week?
MR. GIBBS: I will -- let me check on the long-term schedule. I do anticipate that at some point the President obviously will join in on those discussions, and obviously in going through these plans and ultimately what's decided on how the industry has to be restructured.
Q And is he -- is the task force encouraging Detroit to very strongly consider mergers of any kind? Are they giving that kind of advice?
MR. GIBBS: Let me -- I will try to get as best a readout as I can. Like I said, I was not in that meeting.
Q Robert.
MR. GIBBS: Yes, Major.
Q U.N. officials acknowledged yesterday that they believe that Iran has developed enough enriched uranium for one nuclear weapon. What is the administration's reaction to that? And what are implications for this as he puts together this plan of engaging Iran?
MR. GIBBS: Well, Major, I think that the report represents another lost opportunity for Iran as it continues to renege on its international obligations.
Absent compliance, the international community cannot have confidence that this program is exclusively of a peaceful nature. It does underscore the urgency with which the international community must work together to address these enrichment activities. The review of our policy continues. But --
Q Does it slow it down or change its trajectory in any way?
MR. GIBBS: I don't believe it does. I think that this White House understands that working with our allies that this is an urgent problem that has to be addressed, and that we can't delay addressing.
Q On autos, the President said yesterday in Ottawa that the auto companies will have to go through "significant restructuring" -- those were his two words. Is there any way that that can be achieved, based on what the task force has seen so far, absent bankruptcy?
MR. GIBBS: Well, again, let me get a readout from what they've seen and what they discussed today.
Q Lastly, will there ever be a time in the administration when the stock market will be a barometer for the President's economic success? (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: Depends. (Laughter.)
Q Robert --
MR. GIBBS: Hold on, I'll get there. Yes, sir.
Q Robert, you all have promised that the President would make a speech in a Muslim nation within the first 100 days. Are you going to keep that promise? And on a more parochial and local issue, does the -- will the President's limousines bear the "Taxation Without Representation" license plates that Bill Clinton's limousines once did and that George Bush's did not?
MR. GIBBS: I confess I don't have the slightest idea what the license plates on the limousine say now, but I can certainly check on that.
In terms of the speech, we're moving forward with that, and -- but for any number of reasons, I just can't get into those details right now.
Q Does that mean that you all still intend --
MR. GIBBS: We're moving forward with that, yes.
Sheryl.
Q Robert, looking ahead to the budget, and also to Tuesday's address, how much will the President use each of these two occasions to lay out very specific agendas for some of his initiatives going forward, particularly energy and health care? You were criticized in rolling out the bank bailout plan, that lacked specifics. Will we hear, you know, a comprehensive proposal on these --
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think you've covered Congress long enough to know that it's hard to lay out a budget and not be fairly detailed and comprehensive. I think people will definitely know that the President is taking swift action to invest in renewable energy and ensure that we reduce our dependence on foreign oil, and that we're taking steps to make health care more affordable for millions of Americans, while providing those that don't have health insurance with access.
Q There's been negotiations going on on the Hill with Senator Kennedy to try to come to agreement on some kind of universal access plan. How much has the President been involved in these discussions? And is he willing to defer such a big piece of his agenda to negotiations that are ongoing outside of the White House?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I don't know the degree to which we've been involved. I think it's a safe bet that anything that goes -- anything dealing with health care is going to go through Senator Kennedy, Senator Kennedy's committee. I think it has to be talked about with many of the stakeholders that are listed in that article. I don't think that we believe that those representing doctors and patients and hospitals and insurance companies and legislators all discussing a path forward on affordable health care is a bad thing. I think just the opposite. We think that's -- it's a good step in the right direction. It's going to take some time, and we're glad that they've started.
Yes, sir.
Q Robert, can I ask about gas taxes versus miles driven taxes?
MR. GIBBS: Sure.
Q Secretary LaHood told AP in an interview that he thinks we should look at this, going to miles driven taxes. But someone -- a spokesman over at the department said, no, that it is not and will not be administration policy. Which is it? And has the President weighed in on this?
MR. GIBBS: I don't believe the President has. I can weigh in on it and say that it is not and will not be the policy of the Obama administration.
Q So was Secretary LaHood speaking out of turn here?
MR. GIBBS: I would direct you to Secretary LaHood on that.
Q Well, we actually interviewed him, so --
MR. GIBBS: Well, call him back. (Laughter.)
Q What about the kind of rants -- back to a response on the kind of rants that there -- against the stimulus package, does the kind of cable debate, cable broadcast debate over the plan, is that damaging to the President's case for a stimulus, or does it help Americans to have an open debate like that?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I don't doubt that an open debate is something that's obviously important. The President used to use the story -- I forget who he quoted -- that people are entitled to their own opinion, not just their own facts. You know, sometimes -- I don't think -- I don't think anybody could sit in front of the TV and listen for an hour and not hear somebody that's making a case that just -- I got to assume they knowing -- they know just isn't true. I think that -- but I think that kind of debate, that -- certainly that debate is helpful.
The impact of it all -- I think I said this last week, that if I hadn't worked on the campaign, but simply watched the cable news scorekeeping of the campaign, we lost virtually every day of the race. I mean, how many days did we cover -- through our trip to Europe through election day -- that the Obama campaign was out-quicked or out-smarted, and we covered ads that were seen by the dozen or so people currently watching that program -- (laughter) -- but not by the rest of America. You know, like I said, if I would have just watched cable TV, I long would have crawled into a hole and given up this whole prospect of changing the country.
Yes, sir.
Q Robert, each time the President talks about the economy, he talks both about the challenges that we face and then usually has a -- sort of an optimistic line about -- that we'll get through this. Can you talk about how he's sort of calibrating that message as he prepares the speech on Tuesday?
MR. GIBBS: Well, and I think President Clinton talked about this -- I think the -- and the President certainly has said this for quite some time, that he believes it is very important to be honest with the American people about the struggles and the challenges that we face. We've seen political endeavors in the past that have not been up front with the American people and where they were and the progress or the lack of progress that was being made, and that this President believes it's important that we do that in a forthright and honest way.
The President, as you said, also talks about the fact that he understands that if we take and meet those challenges head on, that brighter days are ahead. He said several times last week that he was an eternal optimist. I think he understands that it's important for him to be confident and hopeful in the path that we're taking, but honest about the many challenges that we face. And that's what he's working on doing.
Yes.
Q Yes, on Iran. Two more on Iran. Is the U.S. trying to convince the Iranian government to change its attitude toward Israel and not to continue its threat to destroy Israel?
MR. GIBBS: Absolutely. I mean, I think the President on any number of occasions has said that -- not just with Iran, but with other groups -- that it's -- they have to stop threatening Israel and the Israeli people.
Q On this IAEA report, does it preclude the possibility of Iran using a dirty bomb? Does Iran have that capability now?
MR. GIBBS: I have not read the full report on that and what that might mean.
Q Robert, thank you. A few days ago when you were asked about President Obama's reaction to the Senator Burris controversy, you said, "I have to say, I've neglected to speak with him." Things have escalated since then. Today Governor Quinn has asked for him to step down. By chance, do you have a read of what President Obama thinks should be done in this case?
MR. GIBBS: I haven't talked to him specifically about all of this. What I also said was -- during that day, which was that Senator Burris -- well, first of all, that the people of Illinois have been through a very trying time with the Governor. The appointment of Senator Burris was -- and his taking the Senate seat was based largely on the representations that he'd made, factual representations that he'd made to the people of Illinois through interviews and through his testimony to the impeachment committee.
We know that -- and has been reported extensively -- that there seemed to be -- some of those stories seem to be at variance with what's happened; that the President is supportive of an investigation that would get some full story out. And I think it might be important for Senator Burris to take some time this weekend to either correct what has been said and certainly think of what lays in his future.
Q Robert.
MR. GIBBS: April.
Q Robert, so going back to this --
Q It sounds like a resignation call.
Q It sounds like you're telling him to resign.
MR. GIBBS: No, I --
Q Going back to the --
MR. GIBBS: -- just for him to take a look at what has been said and for him to come up with an explanation that satisfies --
Q But is there an explanation that can satisfy? I mean, it's gone from one extreme to the other.
MR. GIBBS: Well, that's a question to ask Senator Burris, not Robert Gibbs.
Q Wait a minute, wait a minute. You called on me. Hello, Robert. You called on me.
MR. GIBBS: I haven't talked to him.
Q Okay. But you said he needs --
MR. GIBBS: Hello, April. I answered your questions -- go ahead. I'm in a giving mood today, so fire away.
Q Anyway, you said he needs to take time this weekend, though. And, I mean, you -- this White House is, coming through your mouth, basically saying that this man has shaded the facts and he needs -- or changed -- you said he had a variance. So he needs to go back --
MR. GIBBS: Again, I'm not saying that, April. I think it's been covered -- it's been covered in Lynn's paper, which I read. It's been covered in the Tribune; it's been covered in the Associated Press; it's been covered in a number of places that the testimony that he gave seems to be at variance with what's happened.
Q So did he lie?
MR. GIBBS: That's a question for Mr. Burris.
Kirk.
Q Just following up on an earlier question, Robert -- thank you. President Clinton's comments today -- was President Obama unhappy or -- that the President seemed to imply that he was too downbeat, and that he said that he ought to be talking about being hopeful and completely convinced we're going to come through this?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the premise of that question was that the President balances the challenges that we face with the understanding that we're going to get through tough times as we always have in this country. I haven't talked to the President specifically about his reaction to President Clinton's interview. But I think he understands, as I said, that it's important to be straightforward with the American people about those challenges, to underscore the path that we're taking as being one that he feels will get us on a path toward sustained long-term economic growth, and to give people confidence that those steps are being taken.
Q Next week is shaping up to be a take-your-medicine kind of week, pretty tough week. It's going to be fairly downbeat, isn't it?
MR. GIBBS: I haven't seen anything other than that in the few weeks that I've already been here. (Laughter.) It hasn't been -- I mean, just to address that for a second, Kirk. I mean, I -- look, I -- whether it is unemployment or unemployment claims, or layoffs, or Afghanistan, or energy independence -- I think there are a number of things that we have, for a long time, and the President believes, as a country have neglected and that are important to begin to work on.
Not every one of those decisions is going to be easy, and he understands he wasn't elected to make easy decisions. But he also understands, as he spoke about in the inaugural and I think you'll hear him speak about next week, that we all have a special responsibility to do what we can to put this country back on the right track and to see it through, back to prosperous and better days.
Let me go quickly through my week-ahead. The President has no public events on Saturday. We will endeavor to get you the radio address at a reasonable hour tonight.
Q And the subject, Robert?
Q The economy.
MR. GIBBS: The economy. (Laughter.) Have you seen the radio address? (Laughter.) Specifically about the recovery plan.
On Sunday, the President and the First Lady will welcome the National Governors' Association to the White House for the annual Governors' Dinner.
Q What's the entertainment?
MR. GIBBS: I believe Earth, Wind and Fire. You just wanted me to say that on camera, didn't you? (Laughter.)
Q Can you sing a little --
MR. GIBBS: No, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, I got a tip jar right here and --
Q That's The Way Of The World?
MR. GIBBS: Oh, don't tempt me.
On Monday morning, the President and the Vice President will meet with Democratic and Republican governors from across the country. During the meeting -- all the governors have been invited. Later that morning and into the afternoon, as Jonathan talked about, the President will -- the President and the Vice President will host the Fiscal Responsibility Summit at the White House and lead a frank discussion on how we can address the long-term fiscal problems facing this country.
About 130 people are invited, including Democratic and Republican leadership in Congress, the chairs and ranking members of key committees, and a wide range of community leaders and stakeholders from business, academia, financial and the labor sectors.
Q Can we have a list of --
Q Yes, can we get a list?
MR. GIBBS: Let me see where that is.
The Vice President will open the summit with remarks. Two presentations will follow on the nation's fiscal condition, one by economists and former advisor to Senator McCain, Mark Zandi; and Robert Greenstein, the executive director of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. OMB Director Peter Orszag will introduce the President, who will conclude with some remarks.
After these presentations, participants will break out into smaller discussion groups to tackle specific fiscal challenges facing our country, including tax and revenue, health care, Social Security, procurement and the budget process. Each breakout group will be moderated by a senior administration official. The larger group will then reconvene and report to the President on their initial work.
The summit is the first step in the process of beginning to lay out how we can bring down the deficit and put our economy back on sound financial footing. It opens a week that will be focused on the attention of many fiscal issues. And as you well know, on Tuesday the President will address a joint session of Congress; on Thursday, provide an overview of the fiscal year 2010 budget. That will be released, and there tentatively is scheduled, though I don't have a location yet, domestic travel on Friday. So hopefully we'll be back at a decent hour.
Q And Wednesday?
MR. GIBBS: Wednesday, I don't have anything specific, which means we'll be in Washington. All right? No travel on --
Q Stevie Wonder.
MR. GIBBS: Oh, that's right, the Gershwin Awards and Stevie Wonder.
Thanks, guys.
END 
2:38 P.M. EST
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 2/23/2009
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
________________________________________________________________

For Immediate Release                                        February 23, 2009


PRESS BRIEFING BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room

2:10 P.M. EST


MR. GIBBS: Good afternoon, guys, how are you? I have absolutely nothing to announce, which means we'll go straight to questions.

Yes, ma'am.

Q Thanks, Robert. Is it true that the President was considering announcing a Social Security task force, but decided not to? And can you talk a little bit about how he wants to, today, put meat on the bones of actually addressing some of these problems that carried through on his deficit reduction promise?

MR. GIBBS: Well, Jennifer, I think everyone has seen the President convene today a summit on fiscal responsibility here at the White House. And reports over the weekend about a budget -- that will be outlined in greater detail on Thursday -- that shows a deficit that was inherited before the stimulus of nearly $1.3 trillion that the President believes and the economic team believe that we can cut in at least half at the end of four years, the end of his first term. I think the American people are rightly concerned about the path of this economy, but also concerned that for many years we've had a borrow-to-spend attitude. And what the President hopes to get our country back on is a program that helps us save and invest.

The President outlined in his radio address a budget that is sober in its assessments, honest in its accounting -- which is a change -- that will, as I said, invest in what we need, cut in what we don't, and restore fiscal responsibility.

The President also talked during the campaign about this notion of the fact that it is hard to get to some degree of fiscal responsibility without addressing all of our challenges. I think you'll hear the President begin to talk on Tuesday, and continue what he did in the campaign, to talk about strengthening retirement security, as well as cutting health care costs. I think the articles in the paper demonstrated, for instance, that you cannot -- if you're going to talk about Medicare and Medicaid, you're talking about the rising costs of health care in this country that we've seen outstrip inflation sometimes more than double over the past 10 years.

So without getting ahead of where the President's going to be on Tuesday, I think you'll hear him begin the discussion on restoring a sense of fiscal responsibility to this town and understanding that we have to begin to live within our means.

Q I understand that he's displaying a commitment to that by staging the summit and, as you said, talking about it tomorrow night and further, I assume, on Thursday. But if he doesn't start to put actual action behind that, those numbers aren't going to come down. So --

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think you'll see -- I think you'll see this week the action behind that.

Q What about the Social Security task force?

MR. GIBBS: Well, let me, again, not get ahead of where the President is going to be over the course of this week. I do believe, getting back to that first phrase, I think you will be able to see, both in what the President says on Tuesday and ultimately what is forwarded to Congress on Thursday, will demonstrate clearly the President's intention and desire to see our country return to a path of fiscal responsibility, and in doing so, through honest budgeting, making very tough decisions that the American people understand we have to make, and cutting this deficit in half by the end of his first term.

Yes, ma'am.

Q On the question of bank nationalizations, both Greenspan and Senator Graham have called it a possible option. I think Greenspan said it was the least bad alternative. Are they wrong, or is this something that you're planning to do as part of the program announced today to allow banks to convert their government preferred shares into common --

MR. GIBBS: Well, let me -- without getting into individual actions between banks and financial regulators, I would point you to first the statement that the Department of Treasury put out about that.

The reports mentioned that Citigroup is seeking to take part -- possibly seeking to take part in a provision contained in the financial stability plan that Secretary Geithner outlined last week. The President believes, the economic team believe, and I would simply reiterate what I said here on Friday, that the President believes that a privately held banking system regulated by the federal government is the best way to go about this.

Q So are you ruling out the possibility of taking a controlling in interest in any of these large banks?

MR. GIBBS: Let me repeat that I'm not going to get into discussing what individual banks might do with -- in relation to discussions with financial authorities or individual regulators.

Q Robert, on Jennifer's question about -- when you said action this week, in terms of Medicare and whatnot, without giving away the specific numbers yet and getting ahead of the President's budget, will he have specific cuts to these entitlement programs, to lay them out, when you say honesty in accounting?

MR. GIBBS: I think you will see the President making hard choices, the President making specific -- some specific cuts. There is -- there's no way for us to institute a budget that is free of gimmicks, that's honest in its accounting, and reduce that deficit by half in four years. I think -- I think you'll see real detail around what he's proposing and I think you'll see some real detail around the important investments that he believes this country does have to continue to make, whether that's in health care or in education or in making our country energy independent. All of those things, I think you'll see the President discuss on Tuesday, and then I think you'll see detail wrapped around that on Tuesday.

Q And the -- during the stimulus talks, the President was very firm in saying there could be no earmarks in there at all. Right now, Democratic leaders are crafting this omnibus spending bill of over $410 billion, and there are reports from the Hill that there are over 9,000 earmarks in there already. The President is talking about fiscal responsibility today. Is he going to be leaning directly on his own Democratic leaders to say, cut out these earmarks or I'll veto that spending bill?

MR. GIBBS: I have not talked to the President about the individual spending bill that, as I understand it, is largely left over from last year's session to fund -- minus a continuing resolution -- to fund government. I think that Congress will take that up. I have not talked to the President on that. Obviously he is -- there is concern. Everybody has to be involved in the sharing of pain in this. There are -- when you're at $1.2 or $1.3 trillion deficit, an economy where we are, I think it's everybody's responsibility to act accordingly, and -- but short of talking to the President specifically on that --

Q Would he be willing to use his veto up against the Democratic Congress to back that talk up?

MR. GIBBS: Let me -- let me not get ahead of a discussion with him, not having seen -- or not having had land on his desk what Congress might ultimately send him.

Jake.

Q Without getting ahead of the President, he has made it clear that -- (laughter) --

MR. GIBBS: I'm going to bring him and put him right here, so that I can stand at least two steps behind him. (Laughter.) He, when we do that, won't be taking any questions. So just FYI.

Q But he'll just be ahead of you.

MR. GIBBS: Slightly. (Laughter.)

Q Without doing that, he's made it very clear that at the very least, letting the Bush tax cuts expire is in the game plan. I'm just wondering, there have been other ideas floated out there in terms of tax cuts, whether -- or tax increases, rather, on people who make more than a quarter million dollars a year.

If it doesn't make sense to raise taxes this year because of the recession, might it also be problematic for the economy to recover if taxes are raised next year? Would that principle not still apply?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I guess it -- some of that depends maybe where we are on the economy. Let's understand where we are in terms of the fiscal -- I'm sorry, in terms of the economic recovery plan. You have one of, if not the largest, tax cut ever enacted in a two-year period, as the President stated this weekend, going into people's paychecks beginning April 1.

The President campaigned on a promise to ensure that money would get into people's pockets that had seen their wages decline over the past few years. And he made good on that promise through the recovery plan, and believes that will have a stimulative effect on the economy.

The President has also talked about in some form or another letting the tax cuts for the top 1 or so percent either be repealed or expire, because the President believes that after many years of having a tax code that favored the few over the many, that a combination of both the recovery plan and what may or may not be in the budget for future years begins to right the tables a bit on who this tax code is written for and the people that deserve to be part of the benefit now.

Q Because -- if I could just follow up -- to be more precise in my question, isn't it true that the people who we're talking about raising their taxes, people who make more than a quarter million dollars a year, whether it's going from 35 to 39.6, or the hedge fund managers going from 15 to 35 or 39.6, or capital gains taxes going from 15 to 20 -- that these are the people who will invest to create the new jobs, and at a time of recession, taking their money and giving it to the government or giving it to other people actually could impede the cause of job growth?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the President talked about this extensively on the campaign --

Q But that was before the recession became as big as we now see it.

MR. GIBBS: I think I would posit that the recession was big at the end of the campaign. Again, I think there's an element first of tax fairness. And I think that -- I think this President understands that there have been many benefits for the few at the expense of a few benefits for the many; that through the recovery plan and in the coming years, the President believes it's important that those that have not seen much in the way of an increase in their paycheck have more money in their pockets. That may require those that shared in great benefits, huge benefits in the tax cuts from 2001 and 2003 -- again, importantly, for those making more than $250,000 a year, I think the top 1 percent of all wage earners in this country -- is fairness that the President believes is important.

Chip.

Q On health care, a lot of talk in the summit about health care being the number one item for long-term fiscal responsibility, and moving in the direction of health care reform. For people not terribly sophisticated about all this, like me and the average viewers out there, it just seems counterintuitive that you would insure 40-some million people who aren't insured now and that would save money. How are you going to get the long-term deficits under control by health care reform, which means spending more for more people?

MR. GIBBS: Well, but Chip, let me -- I think one of the things that's inherent in the health care system that this country has right now is we spend more than I think virtually any industrialized country in the world for outcomes that lag many other industrialized countries in the world; that we are, through lack of fundamental reform, paying amazing amounts of money and we see spikes in that each year in what it costs somebody to go get health care coverage in this country. It puts small businesses out of business. It creates a tension where larger businesses aren't able to offer health care to their employees because something that was affordable last year is unaffordable next year because the price increases by 10 percent.

What you will see the President talk about going forward and certainly contained in the recovery plan are investments and steps that can be taken that will ultimately save this country money. The health IT in the economic recovery plan will make health care more affordable, will save patients' lives, and increase the quality and the outcome of the health care that millions of people are provided.

We're not going to be able to -- let me say it this way: Reform is important in order to cut the incredible increases in cost that we see each and every year as businesses and families and individuals struggle to keep up with the pace of health care inflation. What the President will talk about and begin to outline over the course of the next several weeks is to build on the reforms that we saw in the recovery plan, as I mentioned, on health IT that will begin to streamline the process and make it more affordable.

But I think you'll see -- again, not wanting to get ahead of him -- talk -- the President talk about lowering costs for those that are fortunate enough to have health care and ways in which we can provide greater access for families and small businesses to get health care. I would point to the legislation that passed a few weeks ago in Congress and the President signed, increased the share of children covered through the State Children's Health Insurance Program, a model that has worked for many years and was expanded and signed into law by this President.

Chuck.

Q Robert, I want to follow up on Jennifer's first question, which was, did you guys have a Social Security sort of task force or something that was going to be a part of this --

MR. GIBBS: I'll have to get back and -- I will have to go back and read the article and see exactly what's in there and check on that. Whether it is a -- whatever you call it, the President -- I think many of you --

Q So you're not disputing the story?

MR. GIBBS: Well, let me -- can you read back the -- (laughter.) Let me go back and look through. But regardless of what you call it, Chuck, the President is committed to dealing with the rising costs of retirement security and health security in this country. You saw the President talk about, in Iowa and throughout the campaign, ways in which to strengthen the solvency and the longevity of Social Security. You'll see the President talk about, as I just talked about with Chip, take actions to reform our health care system, which will add life to the Medicare trust fund.

Q Speaking of the health care issue, one of the executive orders that I think some people expected the President to sign pretty quickly was something lifting some of the restrictions that President Bush had put on stem cell research. Why is -- is there a reason why he hasn't made that one of his first sort of -- those initial -- like Guantanamo Bay was --

MR. GIBBS: Stay tuned.

Q You said that, I think, a couple weeks ago, "Stay tuned." Again, I'm waiting for the glass --

Q Is it two weeks or less?

MR. GIBBS: This is that sitcom where it says, "To be continued..."

Q Do we tune into next week's episode? I mean -- (laughter.) But what is --

MR. GIBBS: In the running sitcom, it will be --

Q Is it weeks and days, not months?

Q Is there a preference over legislation, Robert?

MR. GIBBS: I would say weeks.

Q Weeks?

MR. GIBBS: Well -- and I'm a -- I don't want to get too far afield from where I am, but I think, as I understand it what the -- what President Bush did through executive order and what legislation sits on Capitol Hill doesn't necessarily -- in some ways, they're two different issues: there's existing federal funding -- there's federal funding for existing lines, and then a broader expansion of federal funding that obviously the President, through Congress, stated his support for.

Q And he believes they are two different things. Some things he can do with executive order -- and that's expanding the lines?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I mean again -- well, what you specifically asked me about was an order that President Bush did in I believe September/August of 2001. And then legislation, which again doesn't -- those things don't fully overlap.

Q So one will be done on executive order, and one will be legislation that you --

MR. GIBBS: To be continued. (Laughter.)

Q Why tinker with Social Security when it's solvent?

MR. GIBBS: Because it is --

Q And you took (inaudible) to 2040 -- there are other issues in front of us.

MR. GIBBS: There are many issues in front of us. But we are not going to get ourselves onto a sustainable path of fiscal responsibility unless, or until, we address many of those issues. The President obviously wants to do --

Q Why is it an issue?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think -- I don't know the exact years, but there is an inflection point in the funding where the trust fund is, if we haven't already passed that line, we're soon to pass the line where what is going in and what is coming out no longer adds to that solvency of the trust fund and is no longer equal to each other.

I think that --

Q Some people are just wanting to take from it. And there's great suffering going on now. So I don't see why you ought to --

MR. GIBBS: Well, Helen, don't posit that what the President wants to do is institute great suffering. But understand that the way the program is structured, and although the solvency may go to 2040 or 2041, there I think is great concern that the number of people paying in and the number of people -- what is paid in no longer equals what is going out. Therefore, in order to get to some sustainable path to fiscal responsibility, the President understands that hard choices are going to be made, and he's going to --

Q Like raising taxes?

MR. GIBBS: The President talked about some specific ways to do that in the campaign, and I think you can't have a discussion without people bringing a lot of ideas to the table to hash through.

David.

Q Thanks, Robert. Two completely unrelated questions.

MR. GIBBS: Excellent.

Q And the first is about climate change legislation. I presume the President will refer to it in his speech tomorrow night. On Capitol Hill, there's been some difference of opinion, with at one point Speaker Pelosi and, on the Senate side, Jeff Bingaman saying that this will be -- that they'll -- they expect to pass climate change legislation by the end of next year. And Henry Waxman and others are talking about doing it on a faster pace. Given that during the campaign the President talked about the urgency of now related to climate change, would he like to see this done this year as opposed to waiting a whole session to get it done?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I -- urgency, as you pointed out, is important. Whether or not -- I mean, I -- I don't know enough about the individual politics in each House and in each proposal to understand whether it's this year or next. I think the President would say if we had significant legislation that began to address climate change and allowed us to spend even more money investing in alternative energies to ensure that we weren't adding to the amount of greenhouse gases in our atmosphere, whether that's this year or next year, I think both of us would agree that that's a big change that we would welcome.

Q And then on --

MR. GIBBS: Your second unrelated --

Q -- the unrelated front. The Justice Department under the Bush administration took a position in opposing the lawsuits you brought regarding the White House email system. Two groups -- National Security Archive and CREW -- filed a suit to force the White House to locate up to perhaps 5 million missing emails and protect others. And the Justice Department filed to dismiss that suit -- the Bush Justice Department filed. You just missed a deadline on Friday, the Obama administration, to remove that Justice Department motion. So is it the Obama administration's position -- is it the same as the Bush administration position on the White House emails? And do you not want to have a full accounting of what might have been missed, lost during the Bush administration?

MR. GIBBS: I'm out of my depth in terms of the legal issues on Friday. Dare I say email the Justice Department and -- I think they're the best repository for such --

Q But given your transparency, your love of transparency and all the wonderful executive orders -- 

MR. GIBBS: I'm not sure I would -- there are many things I love, David. I'm not sure transparency --

Q I meant institutionally.

MR. GIBBS: Yes. (Laughter.)

Q I mean, would you -- do you think that citizens who care about these matters would expect a different approach to this issue from the Obama administration than the Bush administration?

MR. GIBBS: Without understanding the specifics of what the Justice Department has been engaged in, I think you understand that this administration and this presidency seek a greater amount of transparency than Washington has seen. I would leave the specific issues relating to the case that you're talking about to -- for somebody at the Justice Department to answer.

Yes, sir.

Q Back to Social Security. Any speculation about a task force or whatever aside, do you think that it's politically and practically possible at this time to tackle major Social Security reform when you've got all these other big economic challenges that the President has been talking about doing?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that -- I think the discussions that were -- I mean, all of what we're talking about, whether it's fiscal responsibility, financial stability, health care, education, energy independence, recovery -- all of those are -- I think are contained in the larger economic challenges that this country faces right now. The President understands he wasn't elected to preside over a series of fundamentally easy choices and decisions to get us from where we are to where he knows this country can be. Some of those decisions will be hard. He's made many of them in a budget that you'll see on Thursday. But I think the President understands that we have any number of big challenges that have to be addressed and that we can't shy away from.

Q Do you get the sense your Democratic allies have the political stomach to deal with tackling major Social Security reform now?

MR. GIBBS: I think that it is going to be hard. I think it is going to be hard to address a lot of our challenges without dealing with all of them at the same time.

Q In terms of capturing new revenue and counting hedge fund profits as an income, politically is that a much easier risk now than it was? I mean, is that low-hanging --

MR. GIBBS: I think this issue was -- came up in -- they all blur together -- probably the spring of '07. I don't know if it was any easier then, when the President supported those changes. I think that he -- I don't think the decision that -- any decision that he makes on that is not based on the politics of the ease of right now. I think that the decision that he made back in the spring or early summer of the campaign were based on the fundamental fairness of those funds acting a lot more like income than capital gains.

Q But it didn't happen then. I mean, there was opposition and Democrats controlled the Congress then. And now that you're running the tables, do you expect this to happen?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I -- again, not getting ahead of what might be in his budget, but I think the plan that he puts forward, he's confident it provides the best way forward to addressing those problems and putting us on a path toward fiscal responsibility.

Major.

Q Other reports --

MR. GIBBS: Two unrelated questions? (Laughter.)

Q Binyam Mohammed, a Guantanamo detainee, arrived in Britain today. This would constitute the first Guantanamo detainee released freely into society. How does the administration respond to criticisms from some of the military families he met with just a couple of weeks ago that this is premature, it's before the 180-day review is complete, and does not fulfill his promise to them and to the country at large that he would weigh all security implications before making a decision on a detainee for release?

MR. GIBBS: Well, as you state, the President made a decision at the beginning of his administration to close the facility at Guantanamo Bay and to start a process of evaluating the detainees there in accordance with his solemn obligation to do all that he can to keep our country safe, to do it in a way that protects our men and women in uniform, and does so in accordance with our American values. That process, as you know, is ongoing.

In terms of the specifics related to Mr. Mohammed's case, I would point you to the Department of Justice. But the President feels confident that the process that his administration has undertaken will yield results that keep us safer.

Q Can you comment in any way on how the administration decided this person was not only subject to release but would not pose a future danger to the country --

MR. GIBBS: I would point you to Matt over at Justice.

Q Okay. On the question of Treasury, I know you don't want to comment on things that are part of existing authority -- banks coming in and seeking something it can already do. Can you say today, because the markets have been roiled for two days on rumors or speculation or fear of nationalization, that the administration is not actively contemplating anything beyond existing authorities and transactions that can be engaged with between banks and the Treasury Department?

MR. GIBBS: For a lot of reasons --

Q Can you say anything more definitive than that. And if not, why not?

MR. GIBBS: Let me -- let me read -- I felt good about what I said on Friday; the markets seemed to feel good about what I said on Friday -- that the President believes that a privately held banking system regulated by the government is the best model.

Q A follow-up on the question about Guantanamo Bay. Can you tell us who from the administration has gone down there? I know a number of people -- Eric Holder is there today. Who has actually gone to Guantanamo, and what have they reported back?

MR. GIBBS: I know Greg -- I believe Greg Craig has gone, and I know Eric is -- sorry, the Attorney General is down there today. The process for making these decisions is ongoing, and when we have larger announcements and decisions to announce, we'll do that. I'm not going to sort of roll and comment on what the Attorney General or the White House Counsel might have deduced from one visit.

Yes, sir.

Q Is the President going to see General Kayani when he's in town at all?

MR. GIBBS: I don't know the answer to that.

Q Will you check?

MR. GIBBS: I will.

Q Robert, going back to the bank nationalization issue again. You chose your words very carefully when talking about this and there have been market repercussions.

MR. GIBBS: Gibb market, come on. (Laughter.) Somebody called it the Gibbs rally, for goodness sakes. Let's go with that. Right? Come on. (Laughter.) Because people are watching. No. (Laughter.)

Q You were hot on Saturday.

MR. GIBBS: I know. I went up, like, 200 points or something. (Laughter.)

Q Are you in favor of one-day market trends? Because last week you said you didn't -- (laughter.)

Q No, he said "depends." (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS: Only one-hour market trends. (Laughter.)

Go ahead, I'm sorry.

Q What is --

MR. GIBBS: There's no telling what the market just did. (Laughter.)

Q Has the White House crafted a communications strategy to talk about the sensitive issue of nationalization? I mean, do you have to be careful and take great care, at least in talking about this issue, for fear of market repercussions?

MR. GIBBS: I was counseled that when I stood up here that I should take great care in speaking about any number of subjects, for the ramifications for our relationships with other countries, our national security, our banking system, the stock market, my overall well-being -- (laughter) -- might be impacted.

Q I can't help but notice you're reading from a prepared statement on --

MR. GIBBS: Well, I'm reading exactly what I said Friday, in order to make sure that you all understand that I feel so good about what I said on Friday, I thought I'd try it again on Monday. Obviously, there are a lot of moving parts in the financial stability plan. But -- it may sound like a broken record, but it's the belief of the President and the economic team that the structure of a privately held system regulated by the government is the best way to do things.

Q Why not say, "We are not going to nationalize the banking system"? Why not say it just like that?

MR. GIBBS: Like I said, I felt so good about what happened on Friday, I thought I'd do it again.

Q But that hasn't been enough to quiet these fears and anxieties in Wall Street, and bank stocks -- they go up a little bit, they have gone down again.

MR. GIBBS: Major, again, my job is not to --

Q But it leaves open the perception that it's possible.

MR. GIBBS: I understand --

Q Can you close that door at all?

MR. GIBBS: I think you could look at the transcript and posit many possibilities based on any answers on any given day. I don't think that the -- there are any number of challenges that we have in front of us on any number of economic issues. The President and his team work every day on, as you saw today, implementing the recovery through a very strong -- the naming of a former IG at the Department of Interior that's used to rooting out waste and abuse, fiscal responsibility summit to get us on the pathway towards a sustainable budget. Work goes on in financial stability and later this week we'll have legislators down to talk about regulation in the financial industry. A lot goes on to continue to meet each and every one of these challenges.

Christina.

Q On Afghanistan, the Progressive Caucus plans to send a message to the President that they're a little frustrated with his decision to send more troops there. And Congresswoman Maxine Waters said Friday, "We don't want to send our young people off to war without really understanding what we're doing." Is the President concerned about these more liberal members and voters out there frustrated with his decision with Afghanistan? And does he have an exit strategy for Afghanistan?

MR. GIBBS: Well, I don't -- the President spoke throughout the campaign about the fact that we had long ago taken our eyes off of the problem that we faced in Afghanistan, the attacks that struck this country and were planned there; that we needed to draw down our forces in Iraq, add forces to the fight in Afghanistan to ensure that the attacks that we had faced in 2001 don't happen again. I'm not -- I don't think anybody would be surprised that the President made that decision based on the fact that he campaigned on that for a year and a half.

To your larger question, look, the President talked about this in his statement, and will talk about this to some degree tomorrow -- the dangers that we face in a very uncertain world, one of those issues being Afghanistan.

I think that the President's strategy of placing, for the first time in a long time, a focus on that area, in addition to the ongoing 60-day review that the administration is undertaking relating to Afghanistan and Pakistan, are important to reorient where we are in terms of our national security to prevent attacks like the ones that happened in 2001.

Q And an exit strategy will come out of that?

MR. GIBBS: I think the -- the review is a comprehensive review of our policy in that region, including our force structure and our posture as it relates to that.

Q Can I just follow?

Q What do you expect that to be done?

MR. GIBBS: Well, it's a 60-day review that I think began a week or so ago, or 10 days ago. So we've got 50 or so days to --

Q Can I just follow --

MR. GIBBS: Yes.

Q Two questions. One follow --

MR. GIBBS: Two?

Q Well, one -- one is not question really, if I may ask you, did the President watch last night Academy Awards, and if he had seen the famous movie from India?

MR. GIBBS: I don't --

Q And you think he -- if he has not seen it, if he's planning to see it?

MR. GIBBS: Well, he -- I don't know how long he was dancing to Earth, Wind & Fire last night. (Laughter.) I don't know how much -- I left here and still saw a good portion of the Academy Awards while I was trying to go to sleep. I don't know if he's seen "Slumdog Millionaire." I know he -- I know he wants to. (Laughter.) I don't know if he --

Q What movies does he not want to see?

MR. GIBBS: Well, no, I mean -- look, I think the -- a lot of the movies that he has seen recently are movies that might also entertain a 7 and a 10 year old girl -- not sure that "Slumdog Millionaire" would be on that list.

Q My question on Afghanistan, I'm sorry, to follow -- if President was ever briefed as far as A.Q. Khan's nuclear network, which he was the one who gave nuclear technology to Iran and North Korea and many other countries. Now he's a free man; the Pakistani government has freed him. And now he's free to go anywhere and now Iran has already announced that they have -- they are ready to go for the nuclear program.

MR. GIBBS: Well, when that decision was in the papers, I think this administration expressed its concern and -- but without going into a lot of detail about discussions on that subject, I'd leave that for others.

Yes.

Q Robert, the President spent the first month of his administration talking about cutting taxes and increasing spending, and now he's pivoting as necessary with this fiscal responsibility to talk about, in essence, the opposite. Will his budget say that he's going to delay those spending cuts and tax increases to some degree, until we come out of the recession? And if so, does that water down the deficit reduction that he's going to be showing, because he won't be instituting the tough stuff until a couple years from now?

MR. GIBBS: Well, again, not wanting to get ahead of what Thursday might bring, throughout the campaign and throughout that first month, I think the President has talked -- the President has certainly talked about the need to invest in a recovery plan that is now the law of the land, but to understand that in order to continue to have long-term economic growth, that a deficit that was at or near 10 percent of our gross domestic product was by all accounts completely unsustainable; I think I read today that deficits relating to GDP that rivaled that of World War II. Obviously that is something that the President believes can't continue.

So I think you'll see, as I said, the President -- the larger framework of a budget that will include cutting that deficit in half over the course of his first term in order to lessen the percentage of our deficit as it relates to our GDP, and get us on to some sustainable path.

Q But if he's doing that right away, if he's cutting the deficit in the first couple of years, can he also rebuild the economy simultaneously? Doesn't that work against the stimulus?

MR. GIBBS: I think it'll be more illuminated on Thursday, but the President believes that obviously there's a little bit of a push-pull here that we -- we need to ensure the recovery and reinvestment necessary to get our economy moving again.

There's virtually no way to bring down the deficit, long term, unless there is some economic growth. Continued unemployment, increasing unemployment, is certainly not a recipe for our ability to demonstrate progress on the fiscal side of the ledger.

Q Has the White House so far received a letter from a senior figure in Hamas that was passed through Senator Kerry? And given -- well, notwithstanding the restrictions on U.S. contacts with Hamas, is that something that the President would be likely to read?

MR. GIBBS: As I understand it, the letter -- some letter was passed -- conflicting reports from whom -- to Senator Kerry, and that that letter is with the consulate in Jerusalem. That's the only update I have on that.

Thanks, guys.

END 2:55 P.M. EST
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 2/25/2009
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
_______________________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                                         February 25, 2009
PRESS BRIEFING
BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:09 P.M. EST
     MR. GIBBS:  How is everyone?  Good. 
     Q    How are you?
     MR. GIBBS:  I'm great. 
     Q    Nothing?
     MR. GIBBS:  I got nothing.  I got -- were you expecting something big?
     Q    Well, the big speech, you know.  We thought we'd have something.
     Q    Details.
     Q    -- about Friday.
     Q    Why don't I just start? 
     MR. GIBBS:  Go ahead.
     Q    The Pakistani Foreign Minister has told the AP in an interview that he asked General Jones for Predators and that Pakistan wants to take control of any missile strikes inside its country.  Can you talk about that?  Can you say whether that's something that the U.S. would be willing to do?
     MR. GIBBS:  I'm not going to talk about --
     Q    -- not asking about strikes, I'm asking about a request about strikes.  (Laughter.)  
     MR. GIBBS:  It seems enough in the overall architecture of said strikes that I will honor the long-held tradition of not talking publicly about that.
     Q    Iraq, then.  Can you talk about the President's thinking in terms of the different plans, why he appears to be leaning toward this middle-road 19-month withdrawal option?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me say I think you've been told and others have been told on the record that the President has not made a final decision about our force structure in Iraq going forward.  I don't think it would be a surprise to anybody, though, in this room to know that the President, since his first full day in office, has been working toward a solution that would responsibly draw down our troops in Iraq, give more responsibility for governing and security to the Iraqi people, and to do so in a way that protects our brave men and women in uniform. 
     So I don't want to get ahead of a decision the President has yet to finally make.
     Q    Well, talk about that and just the process of thinking about -- how could he -- what would be the thinking behind considering anything other than the 16 months --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I don't want anything that I say to predetermine or prejudge a decision that, as I said, the President hasn't finally made.  I think throughout this process the President and his national security team have outlined a process in reviewing, as he said last night, our commitments in both Iraq and Afghanistan, to do so in a methodical way, and as Secretary Gates said, to hear from all of the people that are involved in those commitments and in that decision-making process.  The President did that in making a decision to increase our troop levels in Afghanistan, based on the security -- the short-term security situation there that he thought was increasingly dangerous.
     The President continues to work through that process as it relates to, as he said last night, an announcement that we presume will be very soon on Iraq.
     Q    Like tomorrow at Camp Lejeune?
     MR. GIBBS:  We are not going anywhere on Thursday.
     Q    Friday -- I'm sorry.
     MR. GIBBS:  I anticipate the President to make a decision very soon, and I anticipate that very soon I will have an announcement about a decision he'll make very soon.  All right?
     Yes, sir.
     Q    The President said bluntly last night that more money might be needed to stem the banking crisis.  Is there any sense of how much more might be needed, when the President might be asking for that money, or is he holding off because he sees it as being a politically unpopular move?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I don't know what the audience share last night was, but -- he obviously -- mentioned in a speech viewed by many.  Let me sort of address this in a couple of different ways.  The President has always talked about ensuring that we must do whatever is necessary to stabilize our financial system.  That was the charge that he was given in this election and that he and his economic team have undertaken each day.
     The President also will deliver to Congress an outline of a budget plan tomorrow.  And one of the important principles that's contained in this budget document is transparent and honest budgeting, and an end to some of the Enron accounting that we've seen over the past few years that didn't take into account commitments in Afghanistan or Iraq in the regular budgeting process; didn't account for the possibility of natural disaster; often didn't account for year-to-year cuts in things like the AMT. 
     So the President, underscoring that he'll do whatever is necessary, also believes that a budget document that he sends to Congress should be honest about the full range of possibilities that might or could be necessary down the line to stabilize our financial system.
     Q    So can we expect the budget proposal tomorrow to actually contain a request for further money?
     MR. GIBBS:  I think the President will uphold his commitment to honest and transparent budgeting tomorrow.
     Q    Robert, last night obviously the focus was the economy and the President touched lightly on Iraq and Afghanistan -- only a few seconds, I believe, on Afghanistan.  He's committed 17,000 additional troops to that region.  Was it a mistake not to spend more time giving a little bit more focus to Afghanistan, since this is such a critical, as the President points out, sort of the front, new front on the war on the terror?
     MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't -- look, I think the President has spoken on a number of occasions throughout an almost two-year-long campaign, the transition, and even as President of the United States, about the tremendous danger in that region of the world; that the administration has undertaken a review of our policy as it relates towards Afghanistan and Pakistan in order to ensure, as the President says, that there aren't terrorists plotting attacks on American soil and safe havens in Afghanistan as we speak.
     Look, I think the President's focus last night was primarily on the economic challenges that we face as a nation, the path that he sees the administration and the country taking to get out of and get past many of those challenges to seek brighter days ahead.  I don't think it was a mistake for him.  I think the President has spoken clearly on many occasions about our challenges in that region of the world.
     Q    And in terms of the economy, when will we hear more details?  He was giving a lot of broader themes last night.  When will he sort of fill in the blanks?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think you'll see stuff -- you've already seen some information from Treasury.  You'll likely see more today, as it relates to the health evaluations of banks, so that we can appropriately diagnose what might be needed to stabilize the financial system in many of the banks that may have bad assets or capital needs.
     But, look, I think the reaction from the speech last night from the American people was them seeing a strong and determined leader who laid out an economic vision to get this country back on a path towards sustained economic growth.  And I think the reviews were -- demonstrated that they share confidence in that pathway forward.
     Q    Has the President learned any lessons from the past?  What makes him think he can prevail in Afghanistan after Russians, the British, Alexander the Great could not?
     MR. GIBBS:  Good question.  (Laughter.)  You had me -- I had you up until you said Alexander the Great.  (Laughter.)
     Q    Genghis Khan -- Genghis Khan.
     MR. GIBBS:  -- Alexander the Great -- (laughter.)  No, I --
     Q    It's under -- (inaudible.) 
     MR. GIBBS:  Unfortunately, it's not.  No, I'm kidding.  (Laughter.)  No, the President -- again, the administration is undergoing a review as it relates to our policy there.  The President's decision in the interim to send additional forces in the spring and in the summer related to a sharp deterioration that we've all seen in the security situation; that General McKiernan had long requested additional troops --
     Q    Why are we there?
     MR. GIBBS:  Why are we there?  Because that's the part of our planet that is exceedingly dangerous, and saw on September 11th the root cause of attacks that resulted in the death of more than 3,000 Americans -- the deadliest attack on American soul.  The President has, I think, stated clearly and forcefully last evening --
     Q    Were they all Afghans on 9/11?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I don't know what their citizenship were.  I know where they were when they planned the attacks.  I think the American people do, too.  But the President said clearly and forcefully last night that, under his watch, we're not going to have safe havens in the country of Afghanistan that are planning a next series of attacks on our citizens.
     Yes, Chip.
     Q    The President laid out a very ambitious plan when it came to energy, health care and education.  And I know he alluded to things that were in the budget and talked about requesting a legislation on cap and trades.  But could you lay out just in a little bit more detail how this is all going to play out, what the President wants to see Congress bring up, and how he's going to try to get this agenda through Congress over the next few months or years?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, there's also I think a meeting here this afternoon with Democratic congressional leaders to talk about the focus of the next work period in Congress.  Obviously I think a big load of that will be the budget and the outline that the President will send up to Capitol Hill in the next 24 hours or so, that begins to invest in those things that you mentioned -- in affordable health care, in lessening our dependence on foreign oil, or reforming our educational system so that our children can compete in the 21st century.
     I think each has different components and each has different wants and needs from legislators on Capitol Hill.  Obviously I think the President alluded to the fact that health care -- he was under no illusions that it would be difficult, and obviously it will go through many committees on Capitol Hill.  But he understands the only way to do that is to bring together stakeholders on both sides of the aisle -- business and labor, doctors/providers.  That process will begin next week here to discuss health care reform.
     I know there are different proposals on Capitol Hill regarding energy legislation, including cap and trade.  And there will be elements both in the budget and forthcoming after the budget in terms of legislation to deal with some reforms in our public education system. 
     I would point out, as the President did last night, we made important down payments on each of those investments in the recovery and reinvestment plan, whether it was through medical technology that will reduce errors and result in better quality and outcomes in our health care; an investment in doubling our renewable energy output in three years; as well as a commitment to build and refurbish schools that will result in the 21st century classrooms that our children so richly deserve.
     Q    Just to quickly follow up, does the President anticipate shuffling money around under each of those headlines?  I mean, in terms of education, not spending more money on education, but just spending it differently, or is there going to be a definite -- additional hundreds of billions of dollars?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, we'll have more details on the budget soon, which we'll give you the short answer on that.  Obviously, again, I would point out that some of those investments have come through the Recovery and Reinvestment Plan that will create that foundation for economic growth.
     Q    Last night -- I don't have the text with me, so I'm paraphrasing -- but he talked about health care, not going to waste another year or not going to delay it another year.  Was he setting a deadline for when he wants to have health care reform passed?  Is that going to be this year?
     MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't think it's -- I don't think we'd set any artificial deadlines.  Obviously -- I think the President mentioned that with the work of Congress and the administration, we've done more in the last few weeks than has been done in probably the last 10 years to ensure both affordable health care through, as I just mentioned to Jake, investments in medical technology, as well as a commitment to ensure that every child in America has access to health care through an expansion of the Children's Health Insurance Program that's run through the states that's been wildly successful.
     I think the President acknowledged what many of the American people and what business owners across the country know, and that is we have watched for far too long as health care inflation has skyrocketed, often at far greater than the normal rate of inflation each year; that businesses have to make decisions about whether to lay off people or offer their workers health care -- families certainly sit around the kitchen table making these decisions.  And I think the President, both in discussing health care, as well as education and energy, talked extensively about the notion that for far too long we have put off making these invaluable investments at the detriment of making progress on these issues.  That --
     Q    How long will people have to wait? 
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, hopefully not too long.  Hopefully -- again, the process starts formally next week here.  I know I was asked last week about discussions that have already been ongoing on Capitol Hill involving many players that will ultimately take part in a White House health care summit. 
     Q    So there's no target date for doing --
     MR. GIBBS:  Not -- not as of right now, no.
     Q    Okay.  On Afghanistan.  Obviously a big part of his budget savings is drawing down troops in Iraq.  But, stating the obvious, pouring troops into Afghanistan -- 17, it could be 30, it could be more, you don't know what's going to happen in Afghanistan and what's going to be required.  How can you be so sure that the tradeoff between Iraq and Afghanistan is going to be a huge savings.  Couldn't it end up being a wash?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, without getting into specific force structure numbers, that's part of the necessary long-term review of our policy in the region and what that hopes, through its undertaking, hopes to spell out.
     Obviously what the President has talked about during the campaign is a significant drawdown of our troops in Iraq to end our current commitment there as we know it, ahead of what this country and Iraq have agreed to for later down the road.
     And I think many in the Pentagon and certainly commanders on the ground in Afghanistan and throughout the region would tell you that what the President decided to do in Afghanistan would be impossible to do without a sharp and significant yet responsible drawdown in Iraq.
     Q    I want to go to -- from the speech last night, there were some generalities that I was wondering if you had the details on, and has to do with spending cuts.  He had said that you had identified $2 trillion over 10 years, so $200 billion, I assume, in spending cuts that are coming for programs that you thought -- savings that you thought you had found.  I assume we will hear some of those.  But you also said you identified specific education programs, agribusiness.  Can you name three or four of these programs that you've identified?
     MR. GIBBS:  I can later -- later as the budget comes out, without getting ahead of where the budget it.
     Q    So you will do this tomorrow?  We will see a list of programs that you guys are saying this is what we believe --
     MR. GIBBS:  I would check specifically with OMB about what we -- what the nature of the document is that we'll put forward.  But it's an extensive --
     Q    You will show us the $2 trillion in savings that you believe --
     MR. GIBBS:  I can show you the $2 trillion reduction in the deficit, yes.
     Q    Now, the other question is, what is the President's position on earmarks?  We've heard him talk about earmarks, he doesn't want them -- but he seems to acknowledge he may be signing some legislation that's going to have it.  At what point does he draw the line on earmarks and say, you know what, you send me a bill on earmarks -- with an earmark in it -- what's the line here where he says, I'm not going to sign a piece of legislation that has this many earmarks in it?
     MR. GIBBS:  Right.  Well, again, I've not spoken directly with -- I don't know about the specific reviews that have been or are being undertaken regarding legislation that the House or Senate may or were going to be considering in terms of the omnibus appropriations bill.
     Q    I mean, is that the line here, so if it's a bill that was already being written --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I hesitate to get too far out on this without having a broad discussion with those that are evaluating legislation that, as I understand it now, isn't likely to come up immediately, based on some objections in the overall legislation.
     The President talked -- and I can certainly pull this for you and everyone else -- specific proposals in legislation that the President, as a senator, was deeply involved in; that was contained in larger ethic reforms that passed Congress and was signed into law, I believe in early 2007; that contained some earmark reform and identifying of the sponsors of earmarks.  The President remains concerned about, and I think this was a concern he shared with -- even with his presidential opponent about earmarks -- in understanding how over the past few years, they grew exponentially, that we have seen a reduction in that growth recently, and that the President was extremely proud of the bill that Congress presented him that didn't contain those.
     Q    Would he use his veto pen as a --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's --
     Q    -- as a way of encouraging --
     MR. GIBBS:  I know there's great concern in this building and by the President about earmarks.  Without having looked specifically at a piece of legislation, I'm hesitant to throw out the word -- that four-letter word "veto."
     Q    But is he for -- if there was a line-item veto --
     MR. GIBBS:  Oh, I can assure you he'd love to take that for a test drive.  (Laughter.)
     Yes, Mark.
     Q    Robert, in recent days whenever the President spoke about cutting the deficit in half, he said his goal is to do it by the end of his first term -- not his term; his first term.  What should we construe from that?
     MR. GIBBS:  The meeting of the electoral college in December conferred upon the President-elect a four-year term in which he's -- when I hear back somewhere in the 36th or 37th day of that four-year term -- and I think he was mentioning that four-year term.
     Q    But he was saying "my first term," which seems to suggest he's thinking about a second term.
     MR. GIBBS:  You know, I hadn't really thought about it.  (Laughter.)  The President is focused on day 36 or day 37 and not what would be day 1,400 or 1,401.
     Yes, Ed.
     Q    Robert, to what extent has the health care process been slowed by the absence of a Secretary of Health and Human Services?  And if the process hasn't, what does that say about that job for whoever takes it?  (Laughter.) 
     MR. GIBBS:  Don't you think that would have been a much more appropriate follow-up once I took the bait on one side of that question or the other?  (Laughter.) 
     Q    Do you think that's -- 
     MR. GIBBS:  I would love to if we can do that on Fridays.  I'm kidding.  (Laughter.)  No, I don't --
     Q    Big step --
     MR. GIBBS:  No, I -- as I just talked about, I mean, the health care summit that will be -- that will take place here in the White House will include a number of people that aren't just the Secretary or Secretary-designate of Health and Human Services.  I don't think that the President would look at the process as being controlled entirely by one job or by one person.  I mean, obviously the process that the President had set up in the original configuration of the White House obviously had one person dual-hatted to do health care reform and HHS.
     So there's a process here in the White House to discuss it.  There will be, as the President said, more detail on that in the budget that's released tomorrow that will show, as he said last night, a down payment on a commitment to health care reform.  I would again return to the answer I gave earlier, that health care reform has moved forward in the past 30 or so days because of investments that we made in the Recovery Act and legislation that was signed because of a strong bipartisan vote in Congress. 
     That's not to say, though, that whoever that eventual nominee and secretary is won't play an extremely important role in both the design, hopefully the passage, and ultimately -- in some ways -- the delivery of the federal government's current responsibilities on health care, certainly relating to Medicare and Medicaid.  The process is ongoing to find that nominee.  And hopefully, we'll have an announcement on that soon.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    You just said a moment ago, Robert, there's great concern in this building about earmarks.  A couple of Cabinet secretaries in their previous life as members of Congress have earmarks in the pending omnibus legislation -- Congressman Solis and Congressman LaHood -- now they're Cabinet secretaries.  Would the President be open to at least encouraging them, in the spirit of taking on earmarks directly, to withdraw those requests for those earmarks in the legislation?
     MR. GIBBS:  Again, I would -- I'll do some checking on the larger discussion about --
     Q    But I mean, would that be a sign of the President's seriousness on earmarks?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think you can take one sign of the President's seriousness on this that there aren't any from him that I know of in that omnibus, largely because there weren't any that were requested last year.
     Q    Would he be open to extending that standard to his Cabinet?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, and that's what I'll certainly seek to look for.  Again, the President has discussed and worked with Congress to pass some reform of this process that now ensures that people like you that are interested can go into a piece of legislation and see the names of those sponsors.  I'm sure that helped greatly in the formulation of said question. 
     But again, this is -- we saw over a period of years a great expansion of the number of earmarks that were considered and approved by Congress.  There has been in the past few years a downward trend on that line, and that the President hopes to continue that downward trend.
     Q    To follow up on Chip's talking about Afghanistan.  The President said last night, we will no longer hide its price -- the price of the two wars, in Afghanistan and Iraq.  Yet at the Pentagon today, Geoff Morrell, the spokesman, said there will be a supplemental in 2010 for war costs.  And the Pentagon frequently asserts that the reason there are supplementals is not to hide the cost, but because it is impractical and difficult, if not impossible, to fully predict the cost of ongoing military operations.
     First of all, do you agree there will have to be a supplemental in 2010, the President's first budget under his signature?  And second of all, do you at least have some comment or evaluation of the necessity at times to supplementally fund ongoing military operations -- and that doesn't necessarily constitute hiding the cost.
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I will check on supplementals, in terms of going forward.  I don't think that -- I think you'll see in the President's budget that he considers honest and transparent, while it may not be a perfect accounting of what one might ultimately find, I think you'll find an effort, a good effort to denote in that budget that there will be costs.
     I think it's hard to -- I mean, take for instance, in previous budgets in which we've had troops in Iraq there's been no accounting for any of that spending in that budget.  Now, that's either -- you could say, I guess, if you wanted to, that there was some delineation of the complexity of budgeting that number, or you could be surprised we had troops in Iraq.  I think that's hard to posit, given what happened over the last seven years.  The President believes --
     Q    So the administration will try to come up with a number, but not necessarily assert that that is the only number?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President will come up with what he believes is an honest number that accounts for, as best he and the team can come up with, an overall spending number for our overseas commitments in both Iraq and Afghanistan.
     But again, I just want to make the point, there -- I'll give you the point on supplementals in terms of understanding, again, that it might be hard to throw a dart and hit the exact number on a board that accompanied the exact total of spending in that fiscal year.  But there wasn't -- there wasn't even a picking up of the dart and throwing it at the board.  There was just a -- I assume their hands were not unlike mine, saying, well, there's no accounting for it in the budget.  I think that was -- would not have met the President's commitment to open and honest budgeting.
     Q    Quick one.  Will the White House still have supervisory interest in the census under Governor Locke if he's confirmed as Commerce Secretary?
     MR. GIBBS:  Who oversees the census wouldn't -- won't change with who that person is.  The director of the census always would report to the Secretary of Commerce. 
     Q    And also, the White House senior staff, as was suggested under --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think members of Congress and the White House have a -- both have an interest in a fair and accurate census count.
     Q    To follow up on Ed's question about HHS.  Can you tell us a little bit about what's taking so long?  We've been led to believe, repeatedly over the last couple of weeks, that there is a leading candidate for this job.  And also, isn't it a little weird to go ahead with a health summit without your health secretary?
     MR. GIBBS:  No.  Again, let me get back to -- I'll take the second part first and get back to what I said with Ed.  I don't  -- I mean, yes, if one person determined the ultimate outcome of all things health care, relating to everything that Democrats, Republicans, business, labor, doctors and providers were doing, yes, we'd wait.  But I think there is a -- I think it's pretty easy to assume that there isn't one person alone that would meet all of those criteria. 
     That's why planning goes forward, both in this building -- you'll see details come forward in the President's budget denoting his commitment to health care reform, as you've seen in the Recovery and Reinvestment Plan.  Because it's important whomever is a nominee at that agency, that this building is working on, as Capitol Hill and others throughout the country are working on, ensuring that ultimately and quickly we can get some health care reform finally passed in this country.
     In terms of names and such, like I said, I'm sort of hesitant to spin the big wheel and play the name game, but as soon as we have an announcement we'll announce it.
     Q    Can I follow up with a quick question about last night?  What did you make of Governor Jindal's response, and did the President see it?
     MR. GIBBS:  I was separated from the President at that point.  I was in Statuary Hall.  I heard some of the speech through an earpiece.  You know, I'm always struck by people that are in and around the budgetary process for a number of years relating to spending in the federal government that suddenly discover we've added $5 trillion to our bar tab.  I thought some of the statements relating to borrowing money and running up debt were certainly interesting given the actions of the previous several years regarding an additional $5 trillion in debt.
     But I -- you know, I would be honest with you to say I focused much more on the President's speech than the response.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Robert, you talk about honest and transparent budgeting and I wanted to come back to Chuck's question about the $2 trillion figure that the President used last night of savings over the next 10 years.  We were told last night that that basically referred to two things.  One is the expiration of the tax cuts on the wealthy that would happen next year.  And two is a reduction of what we are currently spending in Iraq --
     MR. GIBBS:  I think that's a -- I think that's certainly a decent part of it.  I don't know, not having seen -- or at least not having in front of me the formal documents to know whether that's 100 percent.
     Q    Okay.  But let me ask -- is it transparent to say that tax increases are part of savings?  And is it transparent to say that we're going to be saving that much from Iraq when nobody expects that 10 years out we would be spending what we're spending today in Iraq?  Even the previous administration agreed to get out of Iraq by 2012.  And that's the baseline you're culling savings from.
     MR. GIBBS:  It isn't -- I mean, if we're not spending the money, and the money doesn't go out the door, and the money doesn't increase the deficit, and the deficit decreases by some amount, ultimately getting you to the President's goal of having a $1.2 trillion to $1.3 trillion deficit in his first four years in office --
     Q    But nobody expects to spend 10 years from now what we're spending today in Iraq.  And if we use that as our baseline, saying, oh, we're saving because we're not spending what we did 10 years ago, I mean, isn't that sort of setting up a funny money comparison?
     MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't think so at all.  It's an end of -- it's an end to the commitment and the spending of that money.  You know, I think -- I think, again, when you see the budget you will see that decrease in the deficit, and that's reflected both where we started and where we'll end over a four-year period of time in terms of budget deficits.
     Again, revenue that comes in or doesn't go out, I certainly -- I think both whether it's a family sitting around a kitchen table doing a budget or the federal government doing a baseline budget for many years in advance, I think when you're not spending money and your budget deficit goes down, that certainly counts for a decrease in that deficit.
     Q    Does a tax increase count as savings?
     MR. GIBBS:  Again, it's -- you've got additional revenue -- as the President I think clearly said, tax cuts for people that are -- for families that are making $250,000 or more a year, quarter of a million dollars or more -- again, that's an increase in the amount of money that --
     Q    But you said you've identified savings.  That's not really a savings.
     MR. GIBBS:   Again, I think some of this will be clearer when we can be -- can give you physically a budget for you to look at.
     Q    Congressman Kucinich last night said that if the banking bailout doesn't work, there's going to have to be a plan B, which he would actually include even moving the Federal Reserve under Treasury -- a big move.  What would be a plan B?  And is that even in the realm?
     MR. GIBBS:  I did not see Congressman Kucinich's comments and wouldn't get into government restructuring regarding an independent agency adding to the executive branch.
     Q    But how about a plan B?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that the President is focused on getting right the best -- as best he and the team can at the moment for stabilizing our financial system through any number of things that he laid out last night -- an expansion of a lending program that will lend to small businesses and to families, that will address the home foreclosure crisis, and that will, through a series of actions that Treasury will do, measure the overall health of individual banks and make some decisions about capitalization.  That's what the -- it would be hard to work on that and work on some alternative plan at the same time.
     Yes, ma'am.
     Q    When the President stood there looking out over the House Chamber last night, what was his impression of the reception he got?  Did it sound as partisan as it had always been in the past?  Does it give him any pause when he considers the kind of projects he now has to move forward with?
     MR. GIBBS:  I haven't -- I haven't seen probably as many of these speeches as some people have.  But I was awfully struck by the notion that -- and I don't -- somebody had the statistics, but I forget the exact ones -- that in the number of ovations that people gave during the speech, the amazing number that involved both sides of the aisle standing up and applauding.
     Q    What did the President think?
     MR. GIBBS:  I think the President thinks that, as he said in his speech, and particularly, in the conclusion, that though we may disagree on individual issues, and we may not agree -- and certainly haven't agreed on everything up until this point, that our charge by the American people is to work together for that common good.
     And I think that the reception that he received last night was heartening not for the President -- not simply for the President and for members that were in that hall, but I think for the American people that have watched -- it looks a little bit like two kids on a see-saw.  One sits up and one sits down, and then the other sits up and the other sits down, and there's this sort of -- sort of game back and forth.  And I think last night, it seemed that on virtually every broad measure the President outlined in his speech, there was a reaction from both sides at the same time.  Somebody told me -- I did not see -- well, I won't say that, because I didn't see.
     Q    Does he think Governor Jindal had any good ideas in the response?
     MR. GIBBS:  I don't know whether the President -- because he was on his way back here, I don't know the degree to which he physically saw the response.  Again, I think that the President  --
     Q    Has anybody told him what the response --
     MR. GIBBS:  Good question.  I haven't.  But again, I think that -- I think what the President was -- what the President focused on in his speech was laying out the remarkable number of economic challenges that our country faces primarily, but to do so in a way that demonstrated a path forward to meeting those challenges.  I think people -- certainly based on a number of reactions I've seen -- felt confident that the President understands that path toward better days, and that his administration is taking actions to get there.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Robert, you slowed down the vetting process a lot, and that has created sort of a dearth of nominees to the Senate for these second and third-level political jobs -- under secretaries, deputy secretaries, assistant secretaries, administrators.  Can you talk a little bit about what you've done to change the vetting process and whether that's a problem for the government operating right now?
     MR. GIBBS:  Let me get guidance from counsel on any specifics that you might be talking about.  I don't think that the administration believes that we lack the necessary infrastructure to move the country forward and get things done, and I think that's demonstrated by what the President has been capable -- been able to do in a little over five weeks time.
     Look, it takes time to put together that full government and we certainly continue that work.  But I think by any measure, what's been accomplished thus far in this administration -- Fair Pay Act, an expansion of Children's Health Insurance to ensure even more children, a Recovery and Reinvestment Plan that will save or create 3.5 million jobs and contained in its passage one of the largest and most progressive tax cuts our country has ever seen, just to name a few -- demonstrate the remarkable amount of change that in only a short period of time this President has brought to Washington.
     Q    Can you say the thrust has changed from wanting quick appointments at that level to wanting to be careful about not having more --
     MR. GIBBS:  I don't possess a law degree and don't work in the Counsel's Office, so let me get a little bit --
     Q    The Vice President said today that the lack of procurement officers may slow down some of the stimulus Recovery Act spending, and you want weekly reports from those who haven't filled the second and third tier positions in their own Cabinet agencies to expedite that.  So it appears to be a problem, at least as it specifically relates to the stimulus bill.
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, as the President noted last night, the Vice President and his office are in charge of ensuring transparency and accountability in that recovery plan.  I would note that the President announced on Saturday the tax cuts will soon move out in people's paychecks.  I think Housing and Urban Development moved a good chunk of the money that's involved for them just today.  Energy is working to do the same. 
     The President announced just a few days ago with the governors in town, a big chunk of money relating to Medicaid and health care to ensure that they're not having to make drastic cuts that will hurt the people that, because of this economic downturn, need that health care and need that supportive safety net the most.
     The President is satisfied, and the Vice President is working each and every day to ensure that we make progress to get that money out as quickly as possible.  That's why -- that's why he put somebody as important as the Vice President in charge of  -- in charge of that process.  That's why there's an Inspector General that has a very clear record of rooting out waste, fraud and abuse, to ensure that that money is spent only in its intended way.  And the President told both the mayors and the governors that he would not hesitate to call out projects that were being funded that didn't meet the test of what this bill was supposed to fund.
     Q    Thank you, Robert.
     Q    Robert, yes, two questions really fast.
     MR. GIBBS:  I'm here.
     Q    Governor Jindal talked about Katrina in New Orleans.  Then-candidate Obama was talking, had this ambitious agenda for dealing with New Orleans and how to repair the levee system.  When is that going to start surfacing under this presidency? 
     And also, I want to spin the wheel for HHS.  Tell me about John Podesta?     
     MR. GIBBS:  Which one do we want to do first?
     Q    John Podesta -- let's talk about --
     MR. GIBBS:  You want to spin the big wheel?
     Q    Spin the big wheel.
     MR. GIBBS:  Can I buy a vowel?
     Q    Yes.
     MR. GIBBS:  Okay.  Obviously John is a trusted advisor of the President's, was deeply involved in the transition and helping to put together a -- helping to put together the government that we have now.  You know, I am not, though --
     Q    Man for the job.
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I appreciate your confidence in me being able to do that.  But I'm not certainly going to get into or entertain for any number of reasons, not the least of which are each of these individuals by rolling out a cast of many and picking one.
     Q    Okay, now Katrina.
     MR. GIBBS:  On Katrina, I think last week the President extended a Gulf Coast recovery office that's important in taking steps involving our Katrina relief efforts throughout the Gulf Coast.  And I know that there are some Cabinet secretaries that will make trips to the region as early as next week to look at progress or lack thereof that's being made regarding that recovery.
     The President obviously is deeply concerned about ensuring that the federal government keeps its commitment to rebuild not only New Orleans but the Gulf Coast, that we keep the commitments that have been made.  And I think federal funding is one thing that both the President and Louisiana's Governor agree on as it relates to that.
     Thanks, guys.
                                           END            1:55 P.M. EST
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 2/26/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________
For Immediate Release                  February 27, 2009
1:39 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS:  Good afternoon, guys.  One quick announcement before we get started.  President Obama will welcome Taoiseach Brian Cowen of Ireland to the White House on Tuesday, March 17th.  The United States and Ireland have strong bilateral relations, deep cultural ties, and a commitment for positive change in the world.  The President is committed to strengthening our partnership with Ireland to address global challenges.  The President also looks forward to commemorating with the Taoiseach his first U.S. -- I'm sorry, his first St. Patrick's Day in the White House, a celebration which serves as a reminder of the rich history of friendship that our two countries share.
And with that --
Q    Is Obama Irish?
MR. GIBBS:  Good question.  (Laughter.)  We probably still have those t-shirts that say "O'Bama."
Q    A couple budget questions.  I was interested in the language the President used this morning when he talked about the budget.  He said, "There are times when you can afford to redecorate your house, and there are times when you need to focus on rebuilding its foundation."  Quickly, is there any -- should there be any pause taken in those words?  The Obamas have hired a decorator to redecorate the White House.  Do you think that's appropriate?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's understand that each administration is afforded an appropriation from Congress to ensure that the family that moves in, the needs of that family can be met.
Q    Do they have to?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I don't remember the last occupant of the White House having a seven-year-old, and I don't remember the last occupant having a 10-year-old.  So I would say yes.
Q    And more broadly, there's a lot of talk already on the Hill with the arrival of this budget and with the speech the other night about sort of a reorganizing of priorities, removing tax cuts on the wealthy to pay for a lot of the priorities that the President has laid out.  Are you all worried at all that that kind of argument, that class warfare argument could sink the ability to get some of these big priorities through?
MR. GIBBS:  No.  And I think it's important to understand that what the President has enumerated in his budget today is precisely the blueprint and series of promises that he made over the course of two years in the campaign, and that the American people voted for. 
I also think it's important for people that are listening to commentary on the budget or reading about it to understand that there is a -- not only as part of the stimulus package but contained in the budget -- tax cuts for 95 percent of working families in the United States of America, tax cuts for college tuition, tax cuts for savings and retirement security.  What the budget does do -- sort of -- some of the things that the budget does, in terms of changing tax rates, it's important for people to understand, affect people that are -- if they're single, if they make $200,000 a year or more, or a family that makes $250,000 a year or more, it doesn't even affect them.  There's not a member of Congress that makes $200,000 a year or more. 
The budget contains a provision that closes the loophole that provides tax benefits for companies that ship jobs overseas.  The President campaigned extensively on that, and the budget makes real his promise to close that loophole.  And there's obviously other things, including changing the way carried interest is done for hedge funds.
The President believes that these priorities lay out his promises and institute tax fairness, where we are giving tax cuts to the people and the families that need it most in our country, and asking those that have for quite some time shared in the benefits of previous tax cuts to pay a little bit more.  So I think the President and his team have struck the right balance, and it's a budget that I think Americans can be proud of, and that we hope Congress passes quickly.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, how realistic -- also on the budget -- are your expectations of a dramatic drop in funding for the war -- the wars by 2011 -- I think from $130 billion to $50 billion -- given the increase in troops in Afghanistan and the cost of taking personnel out of Iraq?  And I have a follow-up budget question after that.
MR. GIBBS:  Sure.  Well, I think the President -- I know the President will lay out a strategy tomorrow that will begin to draw down -- enumerate the decision to draw down our forces in Iraq, as he's promised, again, throughout the campaign.  And the President and the national security team feel that budget projects are very much in line with their priorities in each of these two countries.  So we feel confident that the projections that are in this budget -- again, some of these are the first time these projections are in the budget, which I think is a change in the way it's been done most recently, and the President feels good about that.
Q    And my follow-up question is on the money that's set aside for the situation in which you would ask Congress for additional funds for the financial sector.  How likely is it that you're going to use that backup plan, and when would you know?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the answer to both of your scenarios is contained, to some degree, in the banking health assessments that Treasury talked about yesterday and are beginning to conduct on some of the largest banks now to accurately diagnose what might ail or what might be needed to fix those particular banks.
Again, the President believes strongly that as we were -- as we were putting into the budget costs going forward in Iraq, costs going forward in Afghanistan, costs going forward in terms of things like Medicare or AMT tax payments that, to be truly honest, the budget needed to have the idea that some additional money, as he talked about in his speech to Congress on Tuesday, might well be needed and should be accounted for.
I would point out also, in talking to the budget team over the past couple days, you know, employing all of the -- I called it yesterday "Enron accounting" or gimmicks that we've seen in this -- in budgets in previous years, the administration could have demonstrated an additional $2.6 trillion in deficit reduction.  So we could have come to you and said that, in fact, the deficit in four years was going to be just about half of what we've projected it to be under the scenario and the accounting that's been used in previous budgets.  The President believed instead it's important to be upfront and honest with the American people about the way the budgeting is being done.
Q    Robert, for those who are making more than $250,000, there's a limit on how much they can write off their taxes, itemize deductions for charitable contributions.  In light of the fact that about a third of these of these charitable organizations are experiencing a dramatic decrease in contributions, how do you stop the bleeding there if you take away a major incentive for these wealthy Americans to give?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, understand two things.  I believe that we're changing that amount from 33 percent to 28 percent, which I'm told is the level equal to that for those income groups, equal to what it was when Ronald Reagan left office in 1989.  I think I would posit that charitable giving under the Reagan administration was probably pretty robust and just fine.
Q    But is there a concern that there's going to be a further decrease, that these charitable groups are not going to get the kinds of funds they need, particularly when people are suffering?
MR. GIBBS:  I think the way that the rules are changed is not likely to dramatically affect that.  I think the best way to likely increase charitable giving is to get -- my sense is that, if anybody is experiencing that, it's -- can somebody answer that?  (Laughter.)  The -- that it's likely that the change in giving is experienced by a downturn in the economy, which, as you know, and which I've talked about, the President is keenly aware of and hoping to turn around quite quickly.
Q    Just a quick follow on another matter.  I understand that the Pentagon is considering allowing media access to see the coffins of war victims to Dover Air Force Base.  Can you talk a little bit about the --
MR. GIBBS:  Let me talk about this, because I know this was asked of the President in his news conference.  The Secretary of Defense will -- you've read this already -- the Secretary of Defense will talk about this fairly shortly over at the Pentagon.  The President asked that the Secretary of Defense review our policy towards media and photos at Dover Air Base for victims returning of -- from Iraq and Afghanistan.
And what the Secretary has come back with, and what the President supports, is a policy consistent with that that we have at Arlington Cemetery, which allows, at the family's permission, for that to be open, which allows them to make that decision and protect their privacy if that's what they wish to do.  And the President is supportive of the Secretary's decision.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, two questions.  One, does the President believe that raising taxes hinders economic growth?  I understand that he believes in fairness in the tax system and he needs to -- they need to reduce the deficit and fund some of these programs.  But is he concerned at all that raising taxes could hinder economic growth?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the tax changes that I mentioned a second ago take place for 2011.   The President, I think, is reasonably concerned about our economic growth in general and getting our economy back on track, and believes -- but believes that the changes that this budget would require in the tax code are good for the American people, doesn't believe that the changes that are being made would hinder economic growth.
I would point -- I think you could point many of these rates for people that make above two hundred -- families that make above $250,000 a year revert to the rates that we saw throughout the '90s when this economy enjoyed fairly robust economic growth.
Q    Okay.  And second question, Paul Volcker today said about the staffing at the Treasury Department, "There is an area that I think is ¼ shameful.  The Secretary of the Treasury is sitting there without a deputy, without any under secretaries, without any, as far as I know, assistant secretaries, responsive in substantive areas at a time of very severe crisis.  He shouldn't be sitting there alone."  He said, "Now, various things have contributed to this, I guess, including vetting procedures, but it's really an unfortunate situation."  And he said that we can't have a weak Treasury at a moment like this.  Does the President agree with Mr. Volcker, that this is a problem, his Treasury staff?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, this President is committed -- excuse me -- to ensuring that we have as many people and as quickly as possible that we can get into this government.  I think I would take a little -- I wouldn't quite agree with everything that our friend, Mr. Volcker, said.  I don't think that the Secretary is alone at the Treasury Department.  I think there are many able people assisting him.
And I was asked somewhat of this question yesterday, and I asked that they pulled some numbers for me.  So I have to figure out exactly the breakdown of -- this includes political appointees and Schedule C appointees, that by the end of February, there were 279 that were staffed up in the first Bush administration, 286 in the Clinton administration, two hundred and -- this was for the whole government -- 288 for the second Bush term, and as of today 483 in the Obama administration. 
Q    In the Treasury Department.
MR. GIBBS:  This is for -- this is government-wide.  I will find out -- I don't have specific Treasury figures in front of me, but I'll pull those.
Q    What's -- because that was the point that he was making, he was --
MR. GIBBS:  These are -- this is in relation partly to some questions that I got yesterday about that.  But no, I think the Treasury Department -- I think what we've asked the Treasury Department to do is certainly a lot, and I think what they've produced, through a Recovery and Reinvestment Plan, in both working on a financial stability package dealing with individual banks, ensuring that we have a way forward that protects our manufacturing base in autos.  We've asked a lot of Treasury, and they're doing a lot of great work.
Yes, sir.
Q    On jobs, which is the big complaint up on Capitol Hill right now from Republicans, that this plan is a job killer, I mean, the $787 billion plan was all about jobs more than anything else, and now you've got a plan in place that -- how can you possibly tax people making over $250,000 something like $667 billion over the next 10 years and not have a downward effect on jobs?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, Chip, how did it work in 1994 and 1995 and 1996 and 1997?
Q    I guess their argument would be, imagine if they didn't have those -- those taxes, how much better it would have been?
MR. GIBBS:  Isn't it interesting that there's always some little slip?  Again, you know -- again, I don't do this by happenstance.  There isn't a member of Congress, if they were to file a single taxpayer form, that makes above $200,000 a year.
Q    Well, Congress.
MR. GIBBS:  Well –-
Q    There's a lot of millionaires up there.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, that's true.  But it's on their income.  I mean, I think it's interesting, as people listen to those complaining about some aspects of the budget, I think it's just interesting to note -- I think the President was pretty clear on Tuesday -- we're talking about people that earn in excess of a quarter of a million dollars a year.
Q    And a huge percentage of those people are small business owners.
MR. GIBBS:  Some of them are, sure.  Some of them are big business owners.  Some of them are home-run hitters in major league baseball.  Some of them run kickoffs back for a living.  Some of them are the President of the United States. 
Q    But a lot of them create jobs.
MR. GIBBS:  Some of them -- certainly, some of them, that's what their job is.  But I would reject this overall premise that when we're asking for tax fairness from the American people, that we're -- that this is going to kill jobs.  I guess if I follow the logic of the Republicans on Capitol Hill, how do you explain last month's unemployment figures?  Current tax rates, 550,000 jobs -- what happened?
Q    This is a unique moment.  (Laughter.) 
MR. GIBBS:  Apparently, it always is.  The President believes that he's put forth a budget and a Reinvestment and Recovery Plan that will save and create 3.5 million jobs, get our economy back on track, make the necessary and needed investments for sustained long-term growth in things like health care, education and energy, and do so in a way that's most fair for the American people. 
And again, I go back to my first thing -- the President ran specifically on the promises that are contained in what he believes is a blueprint and a vision for our future.  And that's what the American people -- that's the result they rendered in November. 
Yes, sir.
Q    A couple things.  One, the President has talked about how everybody has got to chip in on their -- not everybody is going to get what they want right now.  And he was, through his speech, saying that to Congress and to both political parties.  So what of the President's agenda is he not getting?  I mean, it seems like in this budget, as much as he's asking for sacrifice, he is getting everything he's --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think a number of the priorities that we've -- that we've campaigned on are certainly in the budget.  I think that as we get closer to a more detailed budget blueprint which will, as Peter --
Q    Is he willing to give up --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think you'll see there will be some, as he said in his speech, there will be changes to programs in education.  There will be changes to some of his priorities because we understand that in a time of economic crisis we can't and won't get everything that we want.  But the President believes that this budget accurately reflects both his priorities and addresses the needs of this country at the singular moment that we stand in.
Q    On the financial bailout security number, safety net, whatever you guys are calling it -- obviously you came up with a number, you thought that that was a number you might use.  The auto companies, would they potentially be a beneficiary of that -- I know right now it's set aside as financial.  Is it fair to say the auto companies could be --  
MR. GIBBS:  I think it is likely that if the previous -- the previous administration, through loans using TARP money, provided assistance to GM and Chrysler, and I think it's likely that additional funding, if it were both needed and granted, would likely come from that -- some pool of that money, yes.
Q    When is Mexico security our problem? 
MR. GIBBS:  I think there's no doubt that the situation is of interest to the President, strong interest, given the relationship that we have with the country and certainly its proximity to ours.  It's something that the national security team and the President are watching closely.
Q    Can I follow up on that?
MR. GIBBS:  Sure.  I don't know if I've got much, but --
Q    Yesterday, the National Director of Intelligence went to -- I mean, two days ago went to Congress and said that -- because the influence of the drug cartels and corruption, the government -- the federal government of Mexico is losing control of the Mexican territory -- parts of the Mexican territory.  My question:  the White House agrees on that?   The federal government is losing control of parts of the territory?
MR. GIBBS:  I haven't seen those specific reports.  Obviously for, I think, a specific comment on that I would point you over to -- I almost said Governor -- Secretary Napolitano and the Department of Homeland Security.
Q    Robert, can I ask a question about --
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, sir.
Q    The Governor of Texas called for a thousand more troops along the border.  What is the -- is the President considering that?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't have anything on that, but, Todd, I'll certainly check on it.
Yes, sir.
Q    Back to the budget.  Through the years, so many Presidents have made the same kinds of promises that this President, this Budget Director, have been making, about cutting waste, going after military cost overruns, farm subsidies.  One President's sacrifice always turns out to be somebody's sacred cow on the Hill.  What makes you, him, think that this is going to work where so many others have failed?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I would say a couple of different things, but primarily, we -- I think, as I said a minute ago, we stand at a very different moment.  We have a budget deficit that -- before the President took office of somewhere between $1.2 trillion and $1.3 trillion, which constituted right around 10 percent of our GDP.  That obviously is a cause and concern for both this government and for Wall Street. 
The President and his economic team sought to understand that if we're going to have sustained long-term economic growth, then we can't continue to spend the amounts and the -- have the amounts and the types of spending that we've seen in the last few years as that percentage and that deficit have ballooned. 
There is no doubt that the President is going to ask Congress, as Chuck pointed out, ask Congress and himself to make changes and sacrifices that might -- he might not -- or might not be granted in ordinary times.  But I think he would tell you that we're in extraordinary times. 
Q    Now, on the health care down payment, where is the rest of the money going to come from?  It's not in the budget.
MR. GIBBS:  Right.  I think health care reform obviously is going to, as I mentioned yesterday, going to go through a lot of different stakeholders and a lot of different players on Capitol Hill and throughout the country.  The President believed it was important, as he mentioned in the speech, to provide a down payment for health care reform.  The President also understands that we have to do something -- have to do something -- about the cost of health care in this country.  That's why he believed that the investments that we were making as a result of the recovery plan were so important, that an investment in health IT and medical technology would, as many studies have denoted, drive down the cost of health care.
We are not going to be able to increase coverage in this country, but continue to pay the rates and the amounts that we're paying now.  Only by driving down costs are we going to be able to fully understand and realize some larger health care reform that's eluded this country for many decades.  The President said in the campaign that health care reform would be achieved through some additional spending, largely by rolling back tax cuts for the very wealthy, and coupled with some savings in the amount of money that we spend on health care.  And that's where we are right now.
Q    On the budget, can you tell us who wrote the opening chapters of the budget book that you put out?  And since those -- introductory material is usually fairly dry in previous budgets, this time it was quite passionate, some would say almost angry about the situation that you're facing.  Can you talk a little bit about the tone?
MR. GIBBS:  I will admit I haven't the slightest idea who penned with such passion the budget.  I will scour the big building and try to figure out who that might be.  (Laughter.)  No, I think that -- I mean, I mentioned this yesterday -- it is -- you see -- to build on Chip's question earlier, you see passion these days for the amazing amounts of spending in this town.  Some apparently have realized that in only the previous 37 to 38 days, despite their occupancy in the District for many years in which we saw the budget deficit and the debt that this country owes balloon by $5 trillion.  The economic team and the President believe that the path we are on is simply unsustainable; that to make the investments that this country has long ignored and are most needed, that we have to get serious about health care reform and energy independence and reforming the way our public schools teach our children. 
But unless or until we get a hold of the deficit and the debt, we're going to have a hard time growing this economy for the long term.  This President understands that; tough choices are made in this budget to get us to a point where the deficit will be cut in half at the end of four years, because the President understands how important that it.
Q    On health reform, I realize that you guys want to leave a lot of openings for discussions with Congress, and don't want to be overly prescriptive.  But having said that, as an opening White House position, is it -- does President Obama still start with the plan he campaigned on?  Is that his opening sort of position in approaching Congress?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that's the plan that, as he talked about in the campaign, he thought was best to achieve the long-term goals of health care reform.  I would expand, I guess, your question a little bit to include not just people that are in Congress, but stakeholders that include doctors, insurance companies, certainly businesses that are grappling with the rising costs of health care coverage, labor unions.  And I think we all laughed more -- on more than one occasion when the President talked about getting a big table and some chairs together and getting everybody around it to talk about health care reform.
So I think the President understands that this is an issue that has -- been a lot of talk about but little, ultimately, sometimes gets accomplished.  The way to do that is to broaden that discussion and include all of those that have to be involved early.
Q    My question was whether we should assume the White House's position going into those --
MR. GIBBS:  You should.  You should.
Q    Robert, just to follow on Jake's question, are you satisfied with Congress's role in moving nominations, processing nominations along?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes.
Q    What grade would you give them?
MR. GIBBS:  Congress?  (Laughter.)  Oh, A+.  (Laughter.)
Q    There are no concerns with how -- zero concerns --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- look, I'm not probably in a position to adequately grade Congress, and certainly even my small amount of political instincts would steer me away from any desire to do that.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Only if you're going to give them a bad grade.
MR. GIBBS:  No, I -- well, I'll leave that so I don't get into that trouble.
No, obviously, you know, we've asked Congress to do a lot; there's no question about that.  We want to ensure that we can get nominees in to this government as quickly as possible, and we know that Congress shares those goals, too.
Q    The budget foresees $645 billion over 10 years from cap and trade.  Can you tell me who pays that?
MR. GIBBS:  I understand the -- as I understand the notion of cap and trade, you would create a market for renewable energy through a cap and trade system that sets a level of pollution that, if somebody exceeds that level of pollution, they would pay.  As the cap slowly ratchets down, I think the -- probably the best example of something like this -- maybe not totally analogous, so bear with me -- but in the late '80s to deal with acid rain we set a level, and if companies exceeded that level -- but understand what --
Q    Companies initially pay, but then what happens?  Are those costs not, in many cases, transferred to the consumers or the utility consumers?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, here's what we hope happens:  Businesses become more efficient because -- building on Chip's question about job creation and the free enterprise system -- companies understand there's a value now to that.  Therefore, money is used and garnered through this that increases research, develops greater efficiencies, and ultimately makes it more valuable for someone to reduce their pollution out-take than it does to pay for that pollution being emitted.  When that happens, we create jobs; we put people back to work; we provide a market and an incentive for alternative energy and for renewable fuels; and that over time, while that cap goes down, businesses find the most efficient way to make smart economic decisions.
What you mentioned --
Q    Do consumers along the way pay for something?
MR. GIBBS:  What you mentioned is there is likely to be -- and I think Peter talked about this -- there could be instances where higher electricity costs are passed on, which is why the budget that you talked about equates, or connects a Making Work Pay tax credit -- or I'm sorry, tax cut -- with revenue that's received through that cap and trade program.  So that if higher electricity costs are passed on, that consumers have money to pay for it.  Leftover money in a cap and trade system that isn't used for increased research and efficiency would also be passed on.
Q    Let me ask you another separate question.  Is the administration preparing to charge Ali Saleh al-Marri in U.S. judicial courts?  And if so, how would you describe that as a difference from the Bush administration, which always argued that al-Marri should be tried in military commissions?  Justice has (inaudible) just asked you, and the only reason I bring it up here.
MR. GIBBS:  And I appreciate Justice doing that, and I'm not going to comment on that at this time.
Q    We're already hearing some pretty vociferous complaints from Democratic leaders about the plan for Iraq that he's going to talk about tomorrow.  What's your response to them?  And what is the President doing to try and work on these members of Congress?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the President obviously is going to talk about this tomorrow.  The President has charged to his national security team at the beginning of this administration and on the first full day, as I said yesterday, was to bring his national security team and military commanders in the region and on the ground together, to develop a solution and a policy recommendation on drawing down our forces in Iraq that's consistent with what he talked about in the campaign, and allows us to do so responsibly, gives more responsibility to the Iraqis to govern, for government and security, and does so in a way that protects our troops.
The President also talked in the campaign that some force would remain in Iraq for limited missions consistent with training and combating terrorism.  The President will speak more eloquently tomorrow on that, and lay out a plan.  I think it's been noted on Capitol Hill that there will be some members of Congress will be briefed on what the President will say tomorrow later today, at the White House.
Q    But what's the response to the criticism?  I mean, Speaker Pelosi in particular is already upset about the levels that will remain, for example.
MR. GIBBS:  The President asked the national security team to put together a plan that they and he believed would accomplish the goal of removing our combat forces from Iraq in the most responsible way.  The President will lay out exactly what that plan is.  And I think tomorrow you'll see a President and the national security leadership comfortable with the recommendations that have been made and accepted by the Commander-in-Chief.
Q    Robert, I'd like to come back to the question we tried yesterday, now that we have numbers in front of us.  The President claimed the other night $2 trillion in savings, now we're calling it a deficit reduction over the next 10 years.  This chart tells us that $1.5 trillion of that we're getting from lower costs of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
I mean, to get to that number -- you talking about a gimmick -- you get to that number of $1.5 trillion in savings or reductions in war costs, you have to assume that we would have spent $183 billion in 2019, even though all troops are supposed to be out of Iraq by 2011, even under President Bush's agreement.
So how is it that that's not a gimmick, an artificially high number so that we can say we're saving money that wasn't going to be spent in the first place?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me have Peter -- I didn't -- I read some of the passionate rhetoric, but I didn't get quite so deeply into the matrixes.
Q    Do you disagree with it?
MR. GIBBS:  I'm out of my depth, and I'll get Peter to go through those numbers.
Q    It's one number.  It's just one number.
MR. GIBBS:  Which is why I'm going to get Peter to do it.  It won't take long.
Q    For all of us, or just for -- I mean, can we get a response to all of us?
MR. GIBBS:  Sure.  My office is pretty big.
Q    About Iran --
Q    Robert --
MR. GIBBS:  Yes.
Q    Me?  Oh, thank you.
MR. GIBBS:  You're welcome.
Q    While campaigning, President Obama said, as a group, the Hispanics, because of the economy, were suffering the most.  What is he really going to do -- like, now -- for the immigrants, the Hispanics?  They are suffering.  And they just would like to know what's going to happen to them.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think if you look at -- certainly if you break out unemployment numbers and home foreclosure rates, you see what the rate is.  The rate of unemployment is inordinately high; the amount of foreclosures and the percentage and change in that employment of -- it makes up a much broader portion of the unemployed than it did in either the most recent recessions or even ones in the early '80s.
I think that's why the President has laid out such an important Recovery and Reinvestment Plan that, one, will put money back -- directly back into people's pockets; a plan that will address the foreclosure crisis and ensure that people that are playing by the rules can get some refinancing help from the government in order to ensure that they can stay in their homes.
And I think the President, in looking at the economic problems of the country, tried to address both changes in income, as well as changes in our housing policy to ensure that those needs were addressed.
Q    Why is the President meeting with the chief -- sorry -- Robert, why is the President meeting -- on that line of minorities -- why is the President meeting now with the CBC, when he could have met with them earlier to help with the implementation of stimulus, bailout, as well as the budget?  Why now?  Why today, after all of this is said and done, the ink is dried?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't think I understand the formulation of your question.
Q    The formulation of the question is the Congressional Black Caucus wanted to meet with the President to help in the implementation, as he was talking about fixing the economy, helping create jobs.  Hispanics -- I believe 9.6, 9.8 job losses;  African Americans, 12.6 percent job losses.  Why now is the President meeting with the CBC today, versus talking to them earlier and helping to formulate the stimulus, the bailout, as well as the budget?
MR. GIBBS:  April, as you know, the President met with, and the staff met with hundreds of members of Congress in putting together an Economic Recovery and Reinvestment Plan that got through Congress.  The President spoke to the entire Democratic Caucus, of which I'm pretty sure most of the CBC, if not -- I think the entire CBC is in the Democratic Caucus -- in Williamsburg and the House and at the Newseum, here in the Senate.
I guess I would reject the notion that somehow the cares and concerns of those regarding unemployment or housing or anything else haven't been addressed.
Q    Was Burris here for the meeting?
MR. GIBBS:  He's a member of the CBC, so I --
Q    Could you get back to us on that?
MR. GIBBS:  Sure.
Q    And Robert, also, on "pay as you go" -- is there going to be any kind of an impact on the way services are delivered because now the government is changing to this "pay as you go" system?
MR. GIBBS:  No, I -- we hope that the services are delivered more efficiently.  And that is we change the desired funding level that we do so through paying for it, just as each and every family does in this country.  They had "pay as you go" for quite some time and the economy grew, jobs were created and the budget deficit shrank.  And I think the hope is, from the President, that will happen again.
Q    There was some discussion in here yesterday about earmarks, and you said that the President's commitment on the issue was shown by the fact that he had not requested one in the omnibus bill that's currently before Congress.  There's a report this morning that indicates that that may not be the case, and I was wondering if you could address that.
And also, I understand that he did raise some concerns about the bill when the Democratic leadership was here yesterday, and I'm hoping you can expand on the conversation that they had.
MR. GIBBS:  Let me take the second part.  I don't want to get into some private conversations that the President had with members regarding going forward.  I will give you and anybody else who wants it a -- I think the letter that the 37 members of Congress signed about the Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education program on April 2, 2008, to appropriators that, I think, for some people constitutes that earmark -- you'll notice, and I'll have them distribute this letter -- there's no funding level in here.  So the President, as a senator, did not request earmarks for the final two years he was in the Senate.
Q    Is he more concerned, though, about the nature of the rates of increase in the bill, the number of earmarks in the bill?  Did he raise these concerns with --
MR. GIBBS:  I won't get -- I don't want to get too much into some of those private --
Q    Is it not an --
Q    Robert, Robert --
MR. GIBBS:  I'm sorry.  Michael.
Q    Is it not an earmark if he doesn't put a money figure next to it?  I mean, he requested the program.  Is that what you're saying?
MR. GIBBS:  He signed a letter -- signed a letter, which we'll distribute a copy.  The President did not request earmarks the final two years in which he was in the Senate.  That was his policy.  And I think many of you all remember that the President also, for earlier -- for 2005 and 2006, put up on the Internet earmarks and the amounts that he had requested in an effort to garner greater transparency, and did so because he believed that that was important to do.
Q    Robert, the RNC Chair Michael Steele on Tuesday came out very hard against civil unions.  I want to know if the White House has a response, and are there any actions to support civil unions?
MR. GIBBS:  I did not see the Chairman's --
Q    He was asked about if he favors civil unions.  He said, "Are you crazy; why would we want to do that?"
MR. GIBBS:  I would -- the President's position on that hasn't changed since the campaign when he voiced his support.
Q    Robert, there are have been several reports that the President has settled on former Ambassador to Saudi Arabia, Chas Freeman, to head his National Intelligence Council.  Mr. Freeman's organization took a million dollars from the Saudi government, and he later refers to King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia,  saying, "Perhaps you should be called, King Abdullah the Great."  Is this someone that has the kind of detachment necessary to assess intelligence for the U.S. government?
MR. GIBBS:  I've, on any number of occasions, said that I will talk about personnel announcements when we make personnel announcements, and we haven't done so in that.
Q    Robert, critics of this budget blueprint that has been put out today charged that this is a form of wealth redistribution.  Even The New York Times, in its front page story, fourth paragraph, talks about the idea of wealth redistribution.  How do you respond to that?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the same way I did to the other questions; that the President campaigned on, explicitly promising, that he would cut taxes for 95 percent of working Americans if he was elected President.  We did that in the Reinvestment and Recovery Plan, and those tax cuts are also contained in this budget.
The President also said that for those families that make a quarter of a million dollars, $250,000 a year, are likely to see their tax rates revert back to the way they were for most of the '90s.  That's also in this budget.
And the President believes that we have a plan that will lead to long-term economic growth, sustained long-term economic growth, while making those important investments.  And that's what this budget blueprint does, and that's what he campaigned on, instituting fairness in our -- more fairness in our system.  And I think that's what he's done.
Q    Thank you.
MR. GIBBS:  Thanks, guys.
                              END                   2:25 P.M. EST
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/2/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                               March 2, 2009
PRESS BRIEFING
BY
PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
2:11 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS:  Good afternoon.  How are you guys?  How was your commute?  This might be what the President considers a serious snowstorm.  (Laughter.)  So if I wanted to get ahead of any potential question -- (laughter.)  My son is exceedingly excited that his school is closed.
So I'll start, take a few questions.  Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, the stock market is way down, as you know, again today, at levels not seen in more than a decade; construction spending is off; $300 billion more is being sent toward AIG, which had --
MR. GIBBS:  Thirty billion.
Q    -- $30 billion, I mean -- which has very big losses.  And I'm wondering if all of this doesn't argue for perhaps a more rapid and even more radical intervention in the banking system, in the financial system.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, there's no doubt that the economy is, as the President has talked about extensively, in very bad shape.  It's a crisis that spreads not just in this country, but throughout the world.  I think a lot of the news today stems from bad news overseas, economically.
But the President believes, and the team is working hard every day to do all that we can to get the economy moving again.  That's why we demanded that Congress work expeditiously on a Recovery and Reinvestment Plan that we're now in a process of beginning to implement.  We're working on renewed financial stability.  Meetings started last week on financial reregulation.  And we'll see Prime Minister Brown tomorrow, and continue those conversations as we lead into the London economic summit in order to not just do something -- not just have one economy and one country do something, but everybody on the world stage act together to improve our economy.
Look, as it relates to -- I think AIG is a little bit -- is separate, and let me take that separately.  The Treasury Department and others felt that the systemic risk of doing nothing was simply unacceptable.  Today's actions further continue allowing the process of orderly -- the orderly restructuring of AIG.  Their management, as you all know, was replaced in November.  We're focused on taking the steps necessary to restructure AIG so that it, in the long run, no longer poses the type of systemic threat that it poses right now.  And I think today's actions were critical in that restructuring.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, following up on AIG, does the government feel or does the administration feel that this is the last time this will have to happen, or will there be another bailout coming?  And secondly, more broadly, how do you determine which companies to rescue and which not to rescue?
Warren Buffet, I don't know if you saw his comments this weekend, said that --
MR. GIBBS:  You'll be surprised to know I'm not on the Berkshire-Hathaway mailing list, but yes -- (laughter.)
Q    Yes, I'm not, either.  He's written about a lot.
He said that it's easier for a crippled bank with government backing to get credit than it is for a Triple A-rated company.  Is the government picking winners and losers?
MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't -- let me take the second part of that.  Let me first state I'm not going to quarrel with Warren Buffett on the economy, for any number of reasons.
But I do think it's important to understand that -- and you've heard me say this a number of times -- that the way things have been done, specifically about financial stability and restructuring, we're looking at doing differently.  I think that's why you'll see announcements this week -- and you saw some preparation and statements on this in the President's speech to Congress about changing -- providing more capital for lending for small businesses and families I think along the line of what Mr. Buffett talked about.  And I would certainly point you to Treasury and others to go into the specifics of whatever cost-benefit analysis takes place.
But again, I hesitate to build on the question that Steve asked -- you know, I wonder what we'd be talking about today if we let something like an AIG default on the massive amount of debt that it has and what that might do to the economy and to the markets.  The President and his team would rather certainly not have to deal with these questions, but we're implementing a plan that we believe will allow, as I said, for the orderly restructure of how AIG does business in a way that it does not pose the type of threat that it might pose today in the future.
Q    But going back to the original question, do you think -- is this the end, or is there -- will there be more --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the President has said that we'll take steps to ensure that there's not an economic catastrophe.  We certainly hope that it is the end, but understand that Treasury is undergoing the process of evaluations to bank health.  I think one of the things that's important is to adequately diagnose and understand what risks are out there and the size and the scope of those risks.
Yes, sir.
Q    You say you don't want to quarrel with Warren Buffett.  What about Rush Limbaugh?  Over the weekend he had some interesting comments -- (laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  I think he probably knows a lot less about the economy than maybe Warren does.  (Laughter.)
Q    The President has spoken a lot about bringing the country together, and after the stimulus fight there was a lot of hand-wringing in both parties about bipartisanship.  What is the White House's reaction to Rush Limbaugh saying again that he wants the President to fail, specifically on his economic plans?  And how does that bode for bipartisanship in the future, working with Republicans?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the question is a good one.  I think that -- I think maybe the best question, though, is for you to ask individual Republicans whether they agree with what Rush Limbaugh said this weekend.  Do they want to see the President's economic agenda fail?  You know, I bet there are a number of guests on television throughout the day and maybe into tomorrow who could let America know whether they agree with what Rush Limbaugh said this weekend.
You know, I mean, I think he -- I mean, I think it would be charitable to say he doubled down on what he said in January in wishing and hoping for economic failure in this country.  I can only imagine what might have been said a few years ago if somebody might have said that on the other side relating to what was going on in this country or our endeavors overseas.  You know, I'd like to think, and I think most people would like to think, that we can put aside our differences and get things done for the American people.
I will say, in watching a few cable clips of Mr. Limbaugh's speech, his notion of presidential failure seemed to be quite popular in the room in which he spoke.
Q    A quick follow on the omnibus.  Last week it was pointed out that a couple of Cabinet secretaries, LaHood and Mrs. Solis, have earmarks in this omnibus from last year, leftover funding.  Now it's also been learned that Vice President Biden has -- I think it's $750,000 for the University of Delaware satellite station, and Rahm Emanuel $900,000 for the Chicago Planetarium.
Since the President talked so much about earmarks in the campaign, and as President, about keeping them out of the stimulus -- I know this is leftover business from last year -- but as something that he is either going to sign or veto, why not have earmarks that come from his administration essentially at least taken out to set -- send a signal, number one?  And number two, is he -- is there any chance he'll veto this bill and send it back and say, get these earmarks out; there's over 9,000 of them?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think you saw remarks this weekend by the chief of staff and the budget director about the legislation.  Obviously the President is concerned, despite the progress that has been made in this town, about the size and the scope of earmarks that we've seen over the past few years.  I think even the most cynical among us would have to at least acknowledge that the number of overall earmarks has been cut.
I think it's important to recognize that a piece of legislation probably twice the size of the piece of legislation that you're asking me about was passed through Congress at the President's direction without earmarks.  This is the finishing up of last year's appropriations legislation.
And I think what's most important and what the President would tell you is important here is that though he doesn't control everything that happened before he became President of the United States, that dozens and dozens and dozens of appropriations bills will go through Congress and come to his desk over the course of the next four years.  And --
Q    But this incremental reform you're talking --
MR. GIBBS:  Hold on.  Well, hold on.  The President you will see and hear outline a process of dealing with this problem in a different way, and that the rules of the road going forward for those many appropriations bills that will go through Congress and come to his desk will be done differently.
Q    So he'll have a new standard that he's going to lay out for the appropriations bills that will come to his desk that are actually written while he's President?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, sir.
Q    And when is this?
MR. GIBBS:  Soon.  Yes, sir.
Q    Two questions, one on AIG and one on CIA.  AIG, is the administration confident that it knows what happened to the tens of billions of dollars previously given to AIG?
MR. GIBBS:  Is it confident -- I'm sorry?
Q    That they know, that you guys know what happened to the previous billions before you hand over this next $30 billion.
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, the -- I mean, I don't think it's a -- well, obviously you've got a huge insurance company that is losing money not the least of which because of its sheer size and the sheer size and decrease in the growth in our economy.  It experiences a far bigger drop largely because of its size.  But again, the steps that -- that Treasury and others took were to ensure a larger systemic problem wasn't one that we had to deal with here today in letting something just die.
Q    But in terms of specifically the -- I guess it's like $150 billion before.  You guys are confident that you know --
MR. GIBBS:  Yes.
Q    Okay.  In terms of the CIA, this news today that the CIA had destroyed -- before President Obama took office -- about 92 tapes of interrogations.  What's the reaction from the President to this news, and will you guys be trying to find out what happened exactly and perhaps pursuing criminal charges?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I have not spoken to the President specifically since the news report came around a little while ago.  Someone did tell me as part of this that -- because this came out of a criminal case, that there is a pledge to turn over documentation and reasoning around this.  That will be done and the President will get a chance to look at some of that.
Obviously -- obviously this is a -- the development is not good; it's sad.  And I think the leadership in Mr. Panetta and certainly under the guise of this new administration, we want to give the people that work in the CIA the tools they need to keep us safe, but do so in a way that also protects our values.  I think that's why the President outlined so quickly a change in interrogation policies, and said once and for all that torture is not the policy of this country.
Yes, sir.
Q    If I could follow up on Ed's question, I still just don't understand why, if this new policy or these new standards are coming out soon, why not -- why not wait a little while?  This is money that's been waiting a long time anyway, this omnibus.  Why not just wait --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, but --
Q    -- set the new policy, and throw down the gauntlet on this one?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, but as you know, Chip, this is a bill that has to be signed for government to continue its functions I think either past Friday or Saturday of this week.
Q    They can always continue --
MR. GIBBS:  I appreciate your --
Q    -- as they've been doing for months.
MR. GIBBS:  -- and quick progress in the town of Washington, D.C.
But again, I think what is most important here is what the President has done, not just as a senator on this, in increased transparency and accountability.  Very few people put their earmarks on the Internet, like he did.  Very few people went out there and did and said what he did, in terms of identifying the sponsors, which is I think part of the reason why there's so much information now -- the President thinks that's a good thing -- a bill, as I said, nearly twice the size that was done under his leadership in a way that does not have earmarks in it.  And as the dozens and dozens of other bills come forward, we'll do things differently in this town.
Q    But this bill is like a hanging curve over the middle of the plate.  He could just knock it out of the ballpark by saying, this is it -- this is it.
MR. GIBBS:  I love the baseball analogy.  I think you're trying to rope me into -- (laughter.)
Q    He could say, this is it; this is where I'm --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, we are regrettably dealing with leftover business, and -- but I think that the American people will be clear about where -- have been clear about where he stands on this, and what we'll do, going forward, to change the rules of the road.
Q    And on Sebelius, obviously you're a long way -- you've got to be, at this point, pretty far along, since you've got the big event this Thursday -- on determining exactly where you're going to go on health care.  Does that mean she's left out of the planning process here, and she'll be selling a product that she didn't even have a big role in putting together?
MR. GIBBS:  No, no, and I talked about this extensively last week.  I think for anybody -- first of all, I think -- for anybody to assume that on Thursday that we're going to have, unfurl and get agreement from all the stakeholders on health care reform going forward, is rosy, even under the scenario that you just outlined about appropriations in this town.  I don't think she has to worry that there will be plenty to do on health care reform, going forward.
I don't think she's been left out of this.  I think anybody that knows Governor Sebelius, and knows many of the reasons why we -- the President selected and nominated her today is the tremendous understanding of these issues and the managerial skills that she brings to the table in a department that represents a huge portion of the federal government, and an important task and priority as we move forward.
I also believe you'll see many people involved in this effort, and many people involved in the campaign to reduce the cost of health care.  This isn't something that's just going to lie with one or two people.  You'll see this from throughout the -- throughout and across this government, because, as was said also this weekend, right now the cost of health care is crippling the budgets of many businesses in this country; it's crippling the budgets of many families in this country.
I think the President said in his speech to Congress that every 30 seconds somebody declares bankruptcy in this country because of a medical emergency or an illness, and that if we don't act quickly, that it's going to have that same crippling effect on our national budget through Medicare and Medicaid, unless we begin to tackle the spiraling and out-of-control costs of health care in this country.  That's the charge of -- not just of the Secretary-designate, but all the members of his economic team.
Chuck.
Q    Two things.  One, why elevate Limbaugh?  Is this a political tactic?
MR. GIBBS:  You know, I think he elevated himself.  He's got, I understand, a fairly popular radio show.
Q    Well, just ignore him.
MR. GIBBS:  No -- well, you could, but I think people would ask.  Look, I don't think it's a crazy question to ask about the commenting on whether or not somebody that seems to be, maybe for lack of a better word, a national spokesperson for conservative views and many in the Republican Party, what do I think about, or what does this White House think about him, on at least two separate occasions in front of large and applauding audiences seeking the failure of the President's economic agenda.
Q    So we shouldn't view this as a political tactic coming from the White House, looking to pick and choose their enemies?
MR. GIBBS:  You know, I control many things.  The speaking schedule of Rush Limbaugh, I think he and I would agree, I have very little control over.
Q    Does the President have a direct ask that he's going to make to Prime Minister Brown tomorrow having to do with the economy?  You've talked a little bit about simultaneous stimulus and obviously global -- but is there a specific ask of the Prime Minister when he's here that the President is going to make?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, without getting into before the meeting, and I think you'll have a chance to talk to both of them tomorrow --
Q    Are they taking questions?
MR. GIBBS:  We will.  This is the fourth in a series of meetings that he's had with leaders representing the G20 in this lead-up to the London economic summit in April.  And I've said this before, the President -- last September when we were dealing with the beginning of this -- the beginning of the big market turndown and the economic crisis, the President talked about the G20 acting together.
I think you'll see on the docket tomorrow a longer discussion about the world economy.  It's hard to probably pick up a paper here or in England and not deal with many of the same issues.  I also expect things like the security situation in Afghanistan and the NATO mission to be part of that, as well.
But as the President said -- the President said in September that we have to act together in helping to stimulate the economies of the G20, as well as ensuring that there's some financial rules of the road so that we don't find ourselves in the same position a few years down the line.  And I think those are the topics that are likely to dominate both the meeting and the working lunch that they'll have.
Q    Full-blown press conference, with two and two?
MR. GIBBS:  I believe it's going to be some questions.  There's not a --
Q    But how many?  Two and two?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't know the answer to all of the logistics at my ready.
Q    When will we know?
MR. GIBBS:  Almost as soon as I get out of here.  (Laughter.)
Q    Today the President and Kathleen Sebelius both mentioned bipartisanship on the health care -- on health care work.  But in the event -- and with the stimulus, both parties had the basic idea that money needed to be spent, taxes needed to be cut to stimulate the economy.  On health care, it seems that the parties are fundamentally at odds, that the Republicans are still pressing for a much more market-based approach, not a government-organized health care system.  So how do you get bipartisanship on health care?  And how do you get the 60 votes, basically, in the Senate?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the process that starts at the White House on Thursday, and as the President talked about throughout the campaign, is an effort to bring stakeholders together to begin to discuss many of these issues.  I think the President has said on any number of occasions that though he has ideas, he's anxious to hear other ideas, and if a consensus can be reached around a group of ideas that accomplish the goals of cutting costs and increasing access for millions of Americans, he's more than happy to listen and to adopt those.
But I think it is -- the underpinnings of your question are that we need to have -- and the forum will begin to do that, is to look for the consensus on what can be achieved and how we can do that, because whether you come at this as a small business owner or as a Democrat or Republican in Congress, we've all heard the horror stories of -- like I said, whether it's businesses or families that have seen -- that have gone out of business because of this, that have declared bankruptcy or lost their home because of it, or any number of different scenarios because families continue to struggle and businesses struggle with these rising health care costs.
But, look, there's no doubt, Jonathan, that this is the beginning of a long process to bring all of those involved together to begin to discuss these problems.  I mean, I think part of the problem -- part of the solution is getting everybody in a room to discuss it.  And the President talked about getting people around a big table and doing that in a public way.  I think this is the beginning of that in order to seek some of that consensus.
Q    One quick question.  Tomorrow the President is going to be going to the Department of Transportation to be talking about the stimulus funding for infrastructure.  Friday he's going to Ohio.  This is a bill that has been signed into law.  Why does the President feel like he needs to be selling this plan at this point?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the President believes it's important for the American people to see that what is being done in order to stimulate the economy is -- that people see that in a transparent way, that they're able to judge he and others on the implementation of that bill, and I think to give people confidence that this economy can and will be turned around, again, as he said last week, and that we're headed for brighter days.
I guess last week we were too pessimistic and maybe now this week we're too optimistic.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, I'd like to go back to this characterization of these earmarks in the spending bill being leftover business, as you put it.  There was a lot of other leftover business that the President has reversed with executive orders and all kinds of other actions.  Does this just come down to the fact that so many of his buddies have a lot at stake here, that it's just not worth picking a fight on?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, to go back to Jonathan's question, where he pointed out conveniently the lack of Republicans that supported stimulus, I think 40 percent of this plan is Republican earmarks, or 45 percent.  So I don't think this is -- if this is go along to get along, we may be picking the wrong people.
No, I mean, when I talk about leftover business I mean these are -- I don't have to tell you guys that appropriations bills come up in the course of each calendar year in order to fund the ongoing and future functions of budget.  Most of those are done usually before the fiscal year ends, generally before Congress recesses, most assuredly before the next Congress convenes.  And I think blowing through all those hurdles rightly makes it last year's business.
Q    But Presidents have picked fights over these things in the past.  Is it just there's so much on the platter right now that he just doesn't want to do it?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I think that you'll see that the President is going to draw some very clear lines about what's going to happen going forward.
Q    Is this today that --
MR. GIBBS:  No, not today.
Yes, ma'am.
Q    Robert, I just wanted to ask about Nancy DeParle and the fact that she sits on corporate boards that have health and medical-related interests.  Is that -- does the administration view that as any potential conflict of interest?  Are there any potential problems there?
MR. GIBBS:  No.  I mean, obviously, the White House has confidence in her and her abilities as part of the health care reform effort here.  And as I said, I think the team -- the entire economic team being involved -- will be involved in a process that moves an issue that has bedeviled Congress and this town for quite some time.
Q    Is she planning on stepping down from these boards to assume this position?
MR. GIBBS:  I assume so, largely because I think to work here you have to do that.  But before I get out on that, let me check -- let me check with somebody who's got a better understanding of that.
Major.
Q    Robert, on health care, during the campaign the President said he wanted as part of health care reform to keep a private insurance system alive in this country -- not a government-run one-size-fits-all.  But can you help us understand philosophically going into this, does the President believe that with private insurers the government should pursue universal coverage that has universal access across the continuum of health care, or are there some things that people have to work out on their own?  You may emphasize preventative and catastrophic with something that you have to deal with personally in between, or does he want and try to get the stakeholders involved to do something that is across the board -- not only universal in its coverage, but universal in its access?
MR. GIBBS:  I'm probably well out of my depth in terms of -- it took me a long time just to pick a health care plan.
Q    But, I mean, that's really one of the early philosophical, central of the question.  Can you tell us -- understand what the goal is?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, I -- well, I think the goal that the President has enumerated throughout the campaign is a desire to, as I said, see families and business that have struggled with the rising cost of health care, that we have something that's done about that.  The President is proud -- the President -- the President also would like to see coverage expanded for millions of Americans that currently lack access to just basic health care in this country.
I think the President is proud of the achievements that the administration has already made through the investments in medical technology, and in the coverage that was passed, after a lot of bickering and some vetoes, to increase the number of children in this country that are covered.
But look, I think a lot of these philosophical arguments are going to --
Q    Stakeholders will tell you if you go for everything, you can't afford everything.  There's something that you may have to -- to get a universal system, that you have to live without.  Is there anything philosophically --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, again --
Q    -- the President prioritizes one over the other? 
MR. GIBBS:  I think --
Q    You're talking about cost-driver -- catastrophic is a huge cost-driver.
MR. GIBBS:  Right.  Well, and I think the President talked about this in the campaign, right, you know, that -- and this had been the focus of the last several campaigns, that a very small percentage of people, based on illnesses or accidents, end up encompassing a large amount of spending.
Whether that is -- whether one of the ideas is whether you -- that the President talked about in the campaign was, is taking off of the budgets and the balance sheets of businesses this notion of the very, very sick, the very small percentage that capture a lot of the total amount of medical spending -- that in exchange for passing the savings on to the rest of their policyholders or the rest of their workers, that the government might take that catastrophic burden off of businesses.  That's certainly one thing that he's talked about.
Q    Yet he still he --
MR. GIBBS:  That's something that he still favors.  But again, I think that's why this process is both timely, because of the many challenges that we deal with, and unique in the sense that we're bringing all of the stakeholders involved to discuss many of the tradeoffs that you talked about with the larger goals of seeing a system that is less costly and more accessible.
Q    When you say you're going to do things differently on earmarks, does that mean veto threats to come?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me not get ahead of my own threats.
Q    What is the time glossary on this:  soon, very soon, stay tuned?  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  You can sort of match what all that means -- I'll look through it and pick that.
Q    Would it be fair to say this week?
Q    This is a challenge to the blogosphere?  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Please don't say that.  (Laughter.)  We've already established that the e-mail capacity of the White House is teetering on the edge.
Q    Robert, would it be fair to say -- would it be fair to say the President will articulate these before he signs this --
MR. GIBBS:  Yes.
Q    Or --
MR. GIBBS:  Equal to or less than.  (Laughter.)
Q    Robert, you said that the entire economic team will be working on this health care plan and you said it will be a group effort.  Who is leading the way on this?  Who will be the point person, specifically, in dealing with the House and the Senate on this from the White House?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, certainly Nancy will.  But, again, she will head health care reform here in the White House.  But then -- you know, look, anytime you deal with Congress, you're going to involve many different people that work here, whether it's folks like Phil that deal with Congress every day; whether it's others.  I think this is a big enough job for -- that it's going to take a number of people to do.
Q    And who is going to manage it internally here so there aren't so many people involved it becomes weighted down by the bureaucracy of the number of people?
MR. GIBBS:  She's in charge.
Q    She's in charge.
MR. GIBBS:  Along -- as I said, but along with -- I mean, there's -- you know, again, health care I think is this -- one of the reasons why, when I was asked about Governor Sebelius, I think there's a tendency to say:  health care/Health and Human Services; I think obviously this is something that spans across many platforms, not unlike, say, something like energy independence, that a lot of people that work in this building and in different agencies will be involved in.
Q    Robert, briefly back to AIG, from what you say, it sounds like even though it's already sustained the biggest corporate loss ever in this country, this administration is committed to spending whatever it takes to keep AIG in business in some form.
MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- I'm not entirely sure I said that.  I think what I said was the President is -- the President understands that he will take the steps necessary to ensure that there is not a catastrophic failure to our economic system.  That is what the President said in September and, I regret you haven't seen statistics or data that would change that promise.
Q    But what you said earlier -- that the $30 billion today is not by any means the last --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean --
Q    There could be more.
MR. GIBBS:  You know, I'm many things; I am not a specialist in this.  And I think the President, through his budget, demonstrated that we're willing to account for the possibility that more money might be needed, but I wouldn't go so far as to delineate some amount because we understand that.  I think if we take, as Congress has done, on a recovery bill and take some necessary steps to get the economy moving again -- look, I think in some ways a rising tide lifts all those boats because the losses sustained by an insurance company that has many investments, that goes directly to the health of that company.
Mara.
Q    Robert, on the health care summit, does the President still have a preference for an individual mandate for kids, which is what he campaigned on?  That's still his preference?
MR. GIBBS:  I haven't heard him say anything otherwise.
Q    So in terms of guidance, I'm just wondering how much specific guidance he's going to give Congress, or is he going to just stick to principles?  So he still prefers the individual mandate for kids?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, that's what he enumerated in the campaign.  Again, I have not had an extensive conversation with the President regarding differing viewpoints on this.  That's what he certainly enumerated in the campaign.
Q    I guess what I'm asking is, he is going to -- as he works with these members of Congress and gets the ball rolling on health care reform, is he going to stick to principles where he tells them you just have to expand access and cut costs and make -- improve quality?  Or is he going to say, you know, I want an individual mandate for kids, I want a public health care plan to compete with others?
MR. GIBBS:  You know, I think -- you certainly have the statements that he made and the plan that he introduced in the campaign, which is important and operative.  But I think he's anxious to hear from all those involved about what we can do this year.  So instead of either/or, I think it's both/and.
Peter.
Q    Robert, we've had some interesting pushback last week from congressional officials -- Senator Byrd -- objecting to the concentration of power in the White House in the form of czars, or questioning whether this cuts into Congress's prerogatives, and questioning administration officials.  And we also heard Harry Reid object to the earmark policy, saying the Congress is better suited to spend money than anonymous bureaucrats.  The President is asking a lot of Congress, obviously.  Is his Democratic coalition intact?  Are you worried about these kinds of objections?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, without getting into the specifics, I think the President believes that he has a good relationship with Democratic members of Congress.  And I think that both this President and this Congress can be proud of what in a little less than six weeks it's been able to do:  an $800 billion recovery plan; important advancements in pay fairness for women; an expansion of children's health insurance; the enumeration of a plan to greatly reduce our forces in Iraq -- I'm undoubtedly leaving out others.
But I think the President is proud of what's been accomplished and I think Democratic members of Congress can be proud of those accomplishments, as well.
Jon.
Q    Thanks, Robert.  As far as the President's focus on the economy -- obviously most of his energy and brain-space has been devoted to the economy and I think most people probably want him to be doing that.  But has he expressed -- you're with him a lot -- has he expressed any concern to you about things he might be missing and that might not be getting prepared enough when he goes to the G20 and then NATO next month in terms of foreign policy?  What are the potential downsides in terms of not having a whole lot of time to focus on foreign policy?
MR. GIBBS:  Well -- well, first of all, I mean, the President obviously gets and spends a decent portion of his day -- he gets a daily intelligence briefing, as you know, and gets -- spends a decent portion of his day on foreign affairs.
I think obviously the administration is undergoing reviews relating to detainee policy and a comprehensive review of our policy in Afghanistan and Iraq.  But -- and I think certainly Friday's announcement I think demonstrates that the President and his team have changed -- changed America's -- the role that we play in the world and made substantial progress on many of things that he talked about and that the people of the United States elected him to do.
You know, I mean, I think what's interesting in relating to sort of Prime Minister Brown's visit -- you have -- I think many of the things that we talk about and deal with every day are many of the things that people throughout the world, many of the leaders -- particularly those in the G20 -- are dealing with each and every day.
So I think that what is on the issue agenda with Prime Minister Brown and what will be on the issue agenda for both the G20 and particularly NATO -- obviously Afghanistan will be a big deal at that -- will -- I think you'll find a great commonality in the things that the President is working on and discusses each day on those issue agendas.  I don't know that it's fair to say that he's not spent a lot of time either thinking about or acting on foreign affairs, because I think, again, if you look at what this President has both tackled and accomplished in six weeks I think is an agenda that the American people can be proud of because the President certainly is.
Q    And you haven't heard him express any kind of, you know, desire for more time on this subject?
MR. GIBBS:  I think he'd generally like more time to think and act on a lot of things -- the rate at which the pitches are coming at us don't necessarily allow for a lot of time to dig into for the next pitch.
Yes.
Q    Back to the revelations about the destruction of some of the CIA interrogation tapes.  You've mentioned the criminal investigation.  Do you know, has the White House been sort of fully briefed of the status of the investigation?  And can you tell us whether you know whether those results will be made public or whether Congress will be briefed in a closed session?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- let me check.  I mean, obviously there is I assume some sensitivities based on the fact that it's a criminal trial.  But I can certainly check.
Q    Robert, on health care you've talked a lot about bringing all the stakeholders to the table.  Are there any other specific strategies that the White House has looked at after studying the Clinton administration failure on health care, to go forward, to get it finally passed?  Any other specific strategies that you'd look at?
MR. GIBBS:  None that I'm aware of.  I think if you go back and look at the size and the scope of the problem, what families, what businesses and what the government is dealing with has only gotten worse in that gap of time.  I think there is an urgency that has not been felt on many issues that is felt on this.  I think many of the stakeholders that were involved on different sides of this fight more than a decade ago are now largely in the same boat about the notion that something has to be done.
I think I would underscore -- and this is something that we've heard directly from the budget and the economic team -- and that is the failure to address this is not going to just envelop the budgets of businesses and families, but envelop the budget of the United States of America, in a -- to the degree that which it is going to be hard to deal with our other problems.  And I think it's important, and the President believes it's important to begin the process of that fundamental reform in order to bring about the changes that we need.
Q    On Afghanistan, does the President agree with President Karzai that the election in Afghanistan should be held in April?  Or does he tend more to the judgment of the Independent Electoral Commission, which says more time is needed to allow the polls to be free and fair and secure?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me double-check specifically on that question so that I don't cause some sort of problem there. 
April.
Q    Robert, two things.  One, going back to Rush Limbaugh -- last week, in the President's fifth week, he referenced the fact that, you know, I may not have the bipartisan support that I'm having right now.  Understanding that, was the White House seeing the bipartisan wall cracking a bit?  And now is there concern that with this Rush Limbaugh, I guess, national rally, as he considered it, from CPAC this weekend, is there a fear that the bipartisanship is going to move out a little bit quicker than you thought originally?
MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't -- you know, I don't think that's the case, because as I've argued from up here, there tends to be a viewpoint of only -- a viewpoint in this town of only people that live in this town.  I think you saw during the stimulus debate any number of Republican governors that supported a Recovery and Reinvestment Plan because they understood the problems that were happening in their economies and in their states that needed immediate attention.  You've seen mayors come through this building that had the very same concerns.
Look, again, I would -- if people want to ask Republicans whether they agree with Rush Limbaugh or with others about whether they hope or think that -- whether they hope that the President's economic agenda will fail, that's an excellent question for Republicans to be asked.
Q    So the question I wanted to ask earlier, about these FEMA trailers, we understand that the issue with New Orleans that is -- that the reports were wrong last week.  What is the actual situation, as far as these FEMA trailers, as your Cabinet Secretaries are going into New Orleans this week to see what's working and what's not?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, without getting ahead of what they're going to see, the President is obviously a strong believer in this, and the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Secretary of Housing are going to the Gulf Coast region later this week to assess exactly where we are in terms of an overall recovery related to Katrina.  I would push specifics to the individual agencies, but I think the President is eager to -- eager for an update, as are those two important governmental players, in seeing the degree to which progress has been made, and where progress hasn't been made, what has to be done in order to ensure that complete recovery in the Gulf Coast region.
Q    Is the same disaster relief manual that they had for Katrina that's still in place now?
MR. GIBBS:  I would ask somebody in Secretary Napolitano's office about that.
Q    How concerned are you guys about this Marine One specs that ended up in Iran through the file sharing, and what's being done to prevent that from happening again?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I would point you to the Department of Navy, that has more information on that.  But I think some of the reports that are out there -- again, contact them for the details -- are maybe not exactly as they may seem on television.
Q    I'm wondering if you can explain a little bit more of the President's thinking on going with -- these two individuals, as opposed to one, as it was under Tom Daschle.  And just a follow-up on Juliana's question about Nancy-Ann's connections to the boards.  A company that she sits on could be directly  impacted by the health care bill.  If you could just explain a little bit further how that doesn't present a potential conflict.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me -- I don't have the specifics on that.  I'll certainly look at it.  I don't know that I'd have a ton to offer that I didn't offer Juliana earlier.  But I think the individuals that the President selected he believes are best able to do the individual job responsibilities of both the Secretary of Health and Human Services and somebody to coordinate health care reform out of the White House.
Look, I mean, I think we talked about this, that Senator Daschle was a fairly unique person and brought a unique set of experiences as both somebody who, based on many years in Congress, a pretty substantial understanding of Capitol Hill, as well as a unique understanding of the issue, and that we weren't likely to find somebody like that again.  That's not to take anything, I think, away from the resumes and the experiences that each of these two individuals bring today.
I think particularly -- I think all of us -- many of you have either written about or talked about or talked to Governor Sebelius.  She's been named one of the best governors in the country.  I don't think you can be around her for long and not understand how driven she is and how focused she is and the type of management skills that she would bring to a very large department in our government.
And I think the characteristics and the traits that they bring will allow them to fulfill the jobs that he's appointed them for.
Q    Can you just give us a little bit better of a sense of what Nancy-Ann DeParle is doing?  Is she, like, the chief coordinator -- the chief coordinator at the White House?  Will she be the chief liaison to the Hill?  Kind of what --
MR. GIBBS:  I'll get a little bit more information that we can distribute on that and let you guys know.
Thank you.
Q    What about Wednesday?  Can you tell us anything about Wednesday?
MR. GIBBS:  About Wednesday?
Q    Wednesday.  The day after tomorrow?  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  That was about all I was going to tell you, Mara.  You broke my lead.  I don't understand -- I can tell you it's the -- wait for it -- the day before Thursday.  I don't know -- do you have -- is there a little bit --
Q    Isn't he doing something on Wednesday?
MR. GIBBS:  Assuming that a massive influx of snow doesn't happen, we will be here and give you an opportunity to cover something.
Q    What time is the press conference tomorrow?
MR. GIBBS:  I told you I'd get those details as soon as I got out of here, and --
Q    What time, not necessarily how many questions.
MR. GIBBS:  I know.  April, help me help you.  (Laughter.)  Let me get that direction for you.
                         END                      3:03 P.M. EST
Press Briefing 3/3/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
______________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                 March 3, 2009
 
Press Briefing 
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 

2:40 P.M. EST

     MR. GIBBS:  How is everyone?
     Q    Good.  And you?
     MR. GIBBS:  I'm good. 
     Q    Just like a daily tracking poll.  (Laughter.) Hopping up and down.
     MR. GIBBS:  Yes, I go up and down. 
     Yes, ma'am.
     Q    I wanted to ask about the meeting with Gordon Brown.  He had said before he came that he was interested in reaching agreement with the President.  Can you talk now that they're more into the meeting and things are over with, what they may or may not have agreed to?
     MR. GIBBS:  I have not gotten a full readout, and obviously a number of the things that they were scheduled -- and did discuss -- be it, as they talked about in the Oval Office when you were there, Jennifer, a financial framework to address the financial system as it exists now, not in the past; Afghanistan obviously will be a major topic in April at the NATO summit, as well as issues like climate change -- obviously I think they're in agreement on a number of those issues.  Without anything specific coming out of -- I'll get from our guys a little bit broader download on that.
     But I think as I talked about yesterday, what they were seeking to talk about and discuss are -- I mean, I think there's a commonality in many of the issues that each of the two countries faces right now.  I think if you pick up the newspaper here or there you find many of the same problems and challenges facing our banking systems and our economic systems.  Obviously, as we talked about, Afghanistan and climate change are also topics, among other things, that they wanted to discuss.  I'll try to get a more full download -- fuller download for you guys on exactly --
     Q    Does the President think it's doable or even advisable to have the same banking standards all across the world, like Gordon Brown has said he wants?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think -- and again, and I've made mention of this many times, that the President last year as the economy slipped, especially in the September and October time frames -- that unless everyone acted at the same time to address many of the problems that the economy faced as part of a global recession, that it would be hard to -- hard to get a coordinated recovery.
     I think we've certainly seen that if we don't have some baseline of banking and financial regulations, that, because money can be transferred around the world so quickly, it's important to have a baseline financial understanding of what can and can't happen.
     Obviously many of the things that -- many of the challenges that we face are challenges that they are -- many of the European countries face.  And I think that's going to be part of the continued discussion.  This was the fourth meeting with a head of state for a country that represents those G20 economies in the lead-up to that April summit, which I think the President believes is very important for not only sustained economic growth here, but ensuring that we do have some of those rules of the road internationally to prevent what's happened in the past.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Robert, the President mentioned today that price- earnings ratios for some companies made stocks potentially a good deal.  Is there any cheerleading going on right now from the President?  Is that a strategy?
     And secondly, in an unrelated topic, can you tell us if the President and the Prime Minister discussed the need for other European countries to contribute more to Afghanistan?
     MR. GIBBS:  Let me check specifically on the second one.  In terms of the first one, I mean, I think that the President has, on many occasions, talked about the fact that brighter days for our economy are ahead if we take important steps and make important decisions now about addressing many of the problems that -- and challenges that we face. 
     I don't think that was what he -- what he did today was markedly different than what he's done in the past, in order to demonstrate again that with the right steps, whether it's addressing recovery and reinvestment as we've done, a housing plan, a financial stability plan, financial reregulation, that we can take important steps to get our economy growing again, create the jobs that we know we need, and make the investments that have to be made and have long been ignored as part of sustained economic growth. 
     Q    But he said -- I mean, he wasn't just talking about the economy, which are indeed things that he said before.  He basically said, stocks look like they're good deals.
     MR. GIBBS:  I will ask him if he's got any particular tips for you, Jeff.  Maybe I should have cornered him and gotten a few of my own.
     Q    I mean, the question is -- the core of the question is, is he encouraging people to buy stocks? 
     MR. GIBBS:  I will ask him.  But I think what he's -- I think he's encouraged that we are taking the steps necessary to meet our challenges.  But I would also -- and I've been asked a number of times about this -- he also talked about the notion that it's not his job to comment on or react to what the market does up and down on any given day, but instead to look at the longer term, at the longer horizon, at what can be done in this country to meet those challenges, to create those jobs, to make the investments that we need to in order to meet the challenges and get the economy growing again.  That's what he's been tasked to do by the American people, and that's what he's working on to do. 
     Jake.
     Q    One question about today, and one follow-up on a question from a previous -- of a previous week.  Regarding the stock market, the President said he didn't want to get into the day-to-day stuff, it was like reading a daily tracking poll.  But if your tracking poll is over a matter of a month or two, or going down significantly, that wouldn't be a day-to-day analysis. That would be a trend and you'd be concerned about it if you were running for office -- just using the President's analogy.  Do you think --
     MR. GIBBS:  Late last summer. 
     Q    Is the President at all --
     MR. GIBBS:  I meant '07.
     Q    Is the President at all concerned that what he's selling Wall Street just isn't buying?
     MR. GIBBS:  To use the market analogy.  (Laughter.)
     Q    Yes, that he's proposing all these ideas and economic plans, and it's not that Wall Street doesn't understand them, they don't think they're going to work?
     MR. GIBBS:  No, I think the President quite clearly said today that he has confidence in the plans that are being developed.  Obviously, we're in the beginning phases of implementing the recovery and reinvestment plan -- announcement at the Transportation Department today for $28 billion to save or create 150,000 jobs -- a home foreclosure plan, financial stability.
     Look, I don't doubt, Jake, that there are some on Wall Street, as I've said before, who would like to wake up, have someone come in, take everything bad, move it over here and let everybody start all over again.  And as much as some people may like that, it's not either completely feasible or beneficial to do that.
     Obviously Wall Street has made mistakes and we are in a deep hole that is going to take us some time to get out of.  And I think the American people understand that.  They understand that we didn't get here just off of last quarter, the last two quarters; that we've been heading in this direction in a trend line for quite some time.
     
     But the President is confident in the steps that the economic team is taking and that he is taking to get that economy moving again.  And I think he understands, and I think the American people understand, that if we continue to make these decisions that, as I said, we'll create those jobs and that brighter days are certainly ahead. 
     Again, the President's job is -- he's obviously concerned about any number of economic indicators.  But, again, rather than looking at something even through a one- or two-month lens, again, we didn't get into this problem based on one or two bad months.  We got into this problem based on the trend of many years -- whether it's ignoring the investments that we needed to make that are now taking up a lot of the budgets of families or businesses or even the government, or if we've made regulatory decisions that allowed some people to act in an irresponsible way that many of us are paying for now -- those trends are something that we have to change.
     Q    Just a follow-up on the question that Josh Gerstein from Politico, asked a week or two ago, before Chas Freeman had been named the National Intelligence Council.  There are a lot of people -- including some Democrats in Congress -- who are concerned about Mr. Freeman, both in terms of his ties to the government of Saudi Arabia, and also because of his association and statement of views that some consider to be anti-Israel, as well as the Middle East Policy Journal's publishing of a very controversial essay called "The Israel Lobby."  Is the Obama White House aware of all these concerns?  And what's the response to it?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I've not read -- I've not read those.  I think anybody can look at what the President has said and what the President's views are, enumerating from the very beginning of this administration, the desire to be engaged actively in the Middle East region to ensure a durable and lasting peace is something that he's said he will work on each and every day -- and the Secretary of State obviously in the region today to do that -- I haven't looked directly at that stuff, but I think people can be reasonably assured of where the President is on this and how he'll be actively engaged in seeking Middle East peace.
     Q    Robert, to follow on Jake's question about the stock market.  Is it not so much that Wall Street is not buying what the President is selling, is it that they're not sure what he's selling -- on the bank bailout, for example?  It was back on February 10th -- I'm trying to do a variation on Jake --
     MR. GIBBS:  Is it one or the other?
     Q    Yes, it's an either/or. 
     MR. GIBBS:  We'll bring Jake in for a follow-up.  (Laughter.) 
 
     Q    February 10th, Secretary Geithner came out with his plan to deal with the banks, and there was obviously some negative reaction to that.  And at the time we were told, well, this was a broad outline; details are going to be filled in.  It's three weeks later, and a lot of analysts on Wall Street continue to say, we don't know where the bottom is because we don't know how many toxic assets are out there.  So when are you coming out with more details?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, but let's complicate the question a little bit.  Let's -- because I think you may have seemingly vastly oversimplified that the market on 20-some days ago acted on one piece of information and has followed Jake's trend for the better part of those three weeks in order to get us to where we are yesterday.
     Q    There was a lot of negative reaction to the plan.  We could agree on that.
     MR. GIBBS:  We could, and we could also agree on that -- in watching your network I've seen any number of reports about the earnings of different companies.  I've seen bank problems in Europe.  I've seen bank problems in Eastern Europe.  We've seen regulatory failings both here and overseas. 
     I think the larger message of what the President was trying to convey today is that it's also overly simplistic to look at any one piece of information or one group of information that's driving the market in any particular direction.  I'd --
     Q    Okay, so people could agree --
     MR. GIBBS:  Hold on, let me finish.  I think the broad scope of data and information that we're getting denotes the fact that the economy is suffering severe problems.  I think that's probably what has driven, in the short term, the market to where it is.  And I don't think that's necessarily surprising given the data that we see.  I don't -- I think the market is looking at what Mr. Buffett said over the weekend.  I think the market is probably looking at the notion that the growth rate in the 4th quarter was vastly different than what we presupposed because we ended December -- we now understand that goods were sitting in warehouses, but not leaving stores.
     So I think a lot of things are priced into the market.
     Q    We can agree the President can't control all this economic data, especially around the world and other countries.  But he does have some control over what his administration is going to do about failing U.S. banks, toxic assets that these banks have on their books.  And this administration said at the beginning they were going to deal with that problem.  So the question is, putting aside all the other data, what is the administration doing to deal with U.S. banks?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I've been asked in recent days about Citi.  I was asked yesterday about AIG.  As you know, Treasury and others are beginning the process of trying to find out exactly the health of banks given different economic scenarios.  The President and his team have developed and passed through Congress a comprehensive recovery plan that is beginning.  Tax cuts will start showing up in people's pay checks in April.
     Again, if you want to take just your time line of three weeks or three and a half weeks, I don't think the American -- I think the American people understand we didn't get into this problem in the beginning of February.  So we're not likely to get out of this problem by the end of March. 
     We've got many steps to take, and the administration and the President particularly have taken those steps:  a home foreclosure plan that for the very first time deals with people that have played by the rules, but if the economy changes and gets even worse, they may find their selves the next on their block with a home foreclosure sign.  So let's take steps to reduce that and make sure that the crisis in home foreclosures doesn't spread. 
     The budget obviously doesn't just look in the short term, but lays out a long-term plan for economic growth.  And I would be happy for any number of reasons if this were a three to six week problem.  But I think the American people understand that.
     Q    Does it take longer the longer it is for you to come up with a plan, is really my question, because if you keep three weeks, three weeks, then --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I guess our -- we're passing in the night largely because despite my enumeration of the many things that we're doing, you at least have priced into the market with the acceptance of --
     Q    But you came back to housing and other things, and I understand they're all part of the broader issue.
     MR. GIBBS:  Right.  They're all part of the broader issue because, again, as I've said many times from up here, there isn't just one thing that we have to do.  There isn't just -- if just passing an $800 billion recovery plan would get the economy going again, I'm sure that would be received quite well here.  We'd have more time, probably, on the weekend. 
     But again, there's -- the economy faces many challenges, and the President and the administration are working day and night to address the many challenges that have gotten us to this point, and the many steps that we have to take over the course of the next many months to turn the economy around.
     And look, let me -- let me look ahead.  We have unemployment numbers coming out on Friday.  I don't anticipate that they're going to be good.  I don't know anything, I'm just surmising.  But I don't think that's -- I don't think that speaks to the implementation of the recovery plan.  But I do believe and understand, and the President believes that we have taken and are continuing to take the steps that we need to get the economy back on track.
     Q    On TALF -- and if you can come up with a better name than TALF, we'd be --
     MR. GIBBS:  You don't like that?  (Laughter.)
     Q    -- we'd be overjoyed.  (Laughter.) 
     MR. GIBBS:  How about the business and lending initiative?
     Q    Excellent, excellent.  Well, there's seems to be a lot of confidence out there that this is -- I mean, the President has made very clear that none of this is going to work unless you unlock the credit markets at some point.  Is this the vital piece that is going to let everything else work?  And how can you be so certain?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me say I don't think that -- again, trust me, there's no gun here and no silver bullet, okay?  Only a sustained effort to do any number of different things is going to be what finally gets the economy moving again.
     The President has spoken and spoke today about this notion that we have to -- it's going to be hard for a recovery to happen if we aren't seeing a change in lending.  This is, as you can read from the packet I'm sure you got from Treasury -- it's complicated -- probably why it has that fancy name -- but the goal is quite simple, and that is to provide for small businesses and for consumers that need access to that capital in order to create jobs, in order to borrow money to buy a car, send a child to college, access to that capital, because many of those markets right now are seized up or frozen.
     This builds on a program that has had some success in the past.  But again, I don't -- is this one thing alone going to unclog once and for all a system that poses many challenges for us?  Probably not.  But again, it's one more step in order to provide that solution, to free up lending and capital for people that can't get access to it but want to create jobs, and will help get the economy moving again.
     I'll work on that whole TALF deal.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Robert, I'm Tom Costello with NBC.  This morning Jim Cramer made a note of saying that he thought -- by the way, he's not a conservative.  But he said on the Today Show that he thought that the President's policies, his agenda, had contributed to the greatest wealth destruction he's ever seen by a President.  So along the same lines of whether the President's policies --
     MR. GIBBS:  He's on Ed's --  (Laughter.)
     Q    Following up on Ed's question --
     Q    It's NBC seeking more free publicity.  (Laughter.) 
     Q    Do you want to address that?  Any concern at all --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, you know, this is where I -- (laughter) 
-- have to probably be careful.
     Let me build on what the President said, and that is -- without understanding the basis for what Mr. Cramer said, I'm not entirely sure what he's pointing to to make some of the statements that he's made.  I think you can go back and look at any number of statements that he's made in the past about the economy and where some of the backup for those are, too.
     But, look, some people are on TV every day to comment on the tracking poll, the ups and the downs.  There are other people that were elected to try to fix the problem and try to reinstitute an economy that works for everyone.  For many years, as the President has said often, we had a mind-set that if it was good for Wall Street, it was good for Main Street.  Now we know that's not the case.  The President is taking action to ensure that we can fix what's broken and get the economy moving again.
     Again, some people watch and comment on the day-to-day; the President is much more focused on how to move this economy along for the long term, and not just for those that work on Wall Street, but for those that have investments and live on Main Street.
     Q    But I think the broader context or concern that he was expressing is the President may be losing the confidence of some investors, if not Wall Street -- Main Street investors who are fleeing the markets and -- as reflected by what's happening in the markets.
     MR. GIBBS:  I'm going to get in a lot of trouble if I continue with -- the President -- again, if you turn on a certain program it's geared to a very small audience -- no offense to my good friends or friend at CNBC.  But the President has to look out for the broader economy and for the broader population, some of -- many of whom are investors, but not exclusively investors.  He's taking steps to reregulate our economy so that what happened on Wall Street doesn't happen again; that the trouble that was gotten in because through a number of decisions we decided that leveraging at 30 to 1 was a good idea; or that sub-prime lending was just fine; or that different financial institutions were strong and healthy.
     We now know many of that -- many of those things turned out to be untrue.  A recovery and reinvestment plan, a home foreclosure plan, many of the things that I've talked about, including the investments that we've long ignored making in order to ensure that long-term growth not just for next quarter when investors open statements, but for the long term -- I think the American people are confident that their President is working on that each and every day.  And they have confidence that he has a plan to lead us to something better.  That's what his job is each and every day.
     Q    Were you hinting that you did get in a lot of trouble the last time you went after somebody and promised not -- (laughter.)
     MR. GIBBS:  No, no, I'd -- there are very few days that I've had more fun.  (Laughter.)  I was afraid I was going to have too much more fun. 
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Granted that the President wasn't as fevered this morning as Jim Cramer --
     MR. GIBBS:  He wasn't as what?
     Q    As fevered.
     MR. GIBBS:  I've never seen the President that fevered, so  -- (laughter.)  I've spent a lot of time with him; I don't -- he doesn't drink coffee.     
     Q    Less than 12 hours after Warren Buffett, who is a frequent -- (inaudible) -- with the President, declared that the economy is in shambles, we had the President do -- say something that I haven't heard any other President say, that we ought to be buying stocks.  Now, are you saying --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I don't -- hold on.  I don't have the transcript in front of me.  I don't -- I'm not -- Chip may have it in front of him.  Chip may have it in front of him.  I think he said something -- "it might make them attractive," right?
     Q    Yes.
     Q    If you have a long-term perspective.
     Q    "What you're seeing now is profit and earning ratios are starting to get to the point where buying stocks is a potentially good deal if you've got a long-term perspective."
     Q    Sounds like a buy signal to me.  (Laughter.)
     MR. GIBBS:  Potentially, if you look at the long term.  I guess if you --
     Q    Robert, is that what any President would say at any given time, no matter what the circumstances are?
     MR. GIBBS:  No, I'm not saying that.  But, you know, look, I --
     Q    I didn't finish.  (Laughter.)  No other President has acted like First Stockbroker and given the buy signal.  I have to believe this was calculated to counteract what Warren Buffet was saying.  Am I wrong?
     MR. GIBBS:  No, look, I -- nobody has more respect for Warren Buffet than the President does.  I think if you look at what Warren Buffet said -- and I haven't -- again, I told somebody I don't get the letter, I don't -- trust me, I wish I did -- obviously received a lot of press.  But Warren Buffet said the economy is going to be -- we're going to face economic challenges for quite some time.  I said that 20 minutes ago.
     Obviously, I don't understand -- I don't quite have the stature of Mr. Buffet, but again, I think the American people and the President understand that, again, we're not going to get out of this at the beginning of the second quarter.  I don't think -- and it's going to take some time to get out of the hole we're in.  That's exactly what the President said today.
     I think -- does the President believe that we're taking steps to turn that economy around?  Absolutely.  And he's going to continue working hard to do it.  I wouldn't overly read into different statements as to buy or sell in your particular portfolio.
     Q    He made the statement, though.
     MR. GIBBS:  I was there when he did.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Yes, one on the economy, one on something else, Robert.  By listing all of the different issues -- in response to Ed's earlier question -- all the different issues that have been reported on by various networks and so forth, are you signaling that you feel that the media reporting is having some effect on the public psyche or the public --
     MR. GIBBS:  I would never accuse Ed of talking down the economy.  (Laughter.)  No, I'm kidding.  No, I think it just bears repeating, as people wonder whether one thing alone is going to -- one thing and one thing alone on one given day is going to change many years of what got us to this point.  I think that just bears repeating often.  Again, I think that's -- I think that's where the American people are.  I think they understand that. 
     You know, look, I could get myself into a lot more trouble, and I don't mean in the fun way, commenting from up here on different stories or what have you.  I was simply trying to interpret what the President said regarding the stock market.  There's -- obviously there is concern for the investor class because the investor class are a number of -- is a great percentage of the American public.  The President, though, just doesn't have the luxury of looking at only one thing and focusing on only a few days of that data to determine for some broadcast that evening what he's going to say about the economy on just that day. 
     The President is focused on the long term in understanding that we have to take all these steps, not just for tomorrow but for the many tomorrows to come, to get our economy moving again.
     Q    Entirely different issue.  Where have you decided to come down on the issue of executive privilege?
     MR. GIBBS:  I think there's some impending deadlines on this.  I don't have any more guidance from counsel yet, but I will check when I get done here.
     Q    Appreciate it.  Any idea on just the overall philosophy on the issue?
     MR. GIBBS:  Let me check with them before I get out on that.
     Q    Yesterday when one of the questions about earmark reform came up you said that the President would be outlining some sort of overhaul soon.  Today, Politico is reporting that Steny Hoyer said something along the lines of, I don't think the White House can tell us what to do, but that White House and congressional leadership was in some sort of negotiations.  I'm just wondering how that -- what Steny Hoyer is saying --
     MR. GIBBS:  I'm hesitant to answer --
     Q    -- how that would be influencing what the President is going to be outlining.
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, obviously the President has spoken and will continue to speak to congressional -- members of Congress about this and other issues.  I think the views of the President, as enumerated over the course of many years, are clear, that reform on earmarks is important; that transparency and accountability he's worked to add into the system and believes that there are steps that we can and should take to increase that.
     And I think that's what the White House is working on.  And obviously we'd love to do something with Congress to address a problem -- and I'll give Congress credit -- that has been addressed over the course of the last few years.  You've seen the number of earmarks cut drastically.  I think the Congress would probably give the President some credit, that his measures of transparency and accountability probably had some effect on that and I think that's something he'll seek to continue.
     Major.
     Q    Robert, if you'd allow me to put together a continuum of buy call from the President-Milquetoast cliche about what any President might ever observe about the market, where would you say the President's remarks today fell?
     MR. GIBBS:  I'm sorry, say that one more time? 
     Q    A buy or call from the President -- meaning go out and buy some stocks -- that's at one end of the continuum; and the other end of the continuum is some Milquetoast cliche about stock strategy that any President could say at any given time, considering the status of the U.S. economy.  If you allow that as a continuum, where would you say the President's remarks fell today?
     MR. GIBBS:  What's something in the middle?  (Laughter.)
     Q    Something in the middle would be --
     MR. GIBBS:  To be honest with you, Major, I'd have to give  -- I'd probably have to give it -- I'm joking -- I'd have to give it a little bit more thought in terms of what different points along the --
     Q    So it would fall within that range?
     MR. GIBBS:  You know, I guess I didn't read into it as much as many people may have.
     Q    How does -- what is the President's understanding of the Prime Minister's conception of a global new deal, and how big a fan of it is he?
     MR. GIBBS:  Again, I'll get a specific readout from the meeting.  And I don't want to speak for the Prime Minister on how he's phrased some of these things.  I do believe that he -- that the President believes, I think as many do, that steps have to be taken in order to work collectively to get the world economy moving again; that we have to take steps to ensure that the regulation of our economy is done in a way that find markedly different rules across the continuum; and as I think the President reiterated today, the notion that we have to update -- overall update the regulatory scheme in order to ensure that the very complicated financial system that we have today is met with a regulatory system that doesn't find us months from now or years from now suffering the very same problems.
     So, without getting into, again, or without speaking for him, I think those are the viewpoints of the President.  Again, as I've said many times, the President -- the last thing the -- the last of many bullet points that the President enumerated that week in September that he met with economic advisors in Miami was that we had to work together, that all the G20 had to work together to take action in order to ensure that we get out of this global economic recession.
     Q    Lastly, on the President -- on the letter to the Russian President, Mr. Obama said today it wasn't a quid pro quo.  Senator Schumer is going to the Senate floor in a few minutes to hail it as a Reaganesque overture, a clear quid pro quo that could create a possible solution for ballistic missile and Iranian nuclear question.  Which is it?
     MR. GIBBS:  Never wanting to criticize members of the U.S. Senate.  The President I think has talked about missile defense and Russia -- important that the letter that was sent from the President to President Medvedev talked about any number of issues, again, which the President talked about in the Oval Office, that we will -- talked about the fact that we will consult first with our NATO allies.  You've heard the President discuss the notion that the -- any deployment would be based on a number of factors, including whether or not the system worked and the cost of that system.
     But I think the most important thing that was contained in the letter was the simple notion that if working with our allies and working with Russia we can eliminate the threat, you also eliminate the driving force around the system to combat that threat.  The President and I have said on any number of different occasions that we will use all elements of that national power to address those threats, and rebooting our relationship and working with Russia in order to counter the threats from Iran removes the driving force behind that system.  I think it was a concept that has been enunciated before. 
     Yes, sir.
     Q    How would you characterize the difference between the President's view on this issue and what the Bush administration said about missile defense?
     MR. GIBBS:  I'd have to go back and more closely study precisely what they talked about.  Again, the President believes that in order to meet this and deal with this threat, the ability to work with the Russians to help remove that threat and to have the Iranians live up to their responsibilities is the best way to go.  And obviously, it's something that he communicated to the President, and something that they'll continue to discuss.
     I don't have at least a great understanding of all of that.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Robert, the Justice Department is disclosing some memorandums and whatnot from the Bush administration.  What is the administration's view now on the creation of an independent commission?  Has that changed at all?
     MR. GIBBS:  I have not heard any updated thinking on that.  I think the President obviously is concerned about, as he's said on many occasions, about detainee policy and interrogation tactics, and that he's taken the steps -- beginning steps to address Guantanamo Bay and to put the country firmly on record against torture.  But I also think the President is focused less on looking back and more on looking forward.
     Q    So does he think Senator Leahy is out on a witch hunt here when he's calling for this or --
     MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't think I'd say that. 
     Q    On a continuum of a witch hunt and -- (laughter.) 
     MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't -- I'll try to find anything updated on the President's thinking about this since the press conference and since interviews in January where he talked about this.
     Q    Max Baucus is saying that he wants a health care bill on the Senate floor by this summer.  Does the President want that same thing?  Is that possible?  And how much of a role is the President going to play in trying to set the timetable for what trains move when on the Hill?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, referring to earlier questions about Capitol Hill, I think it's -- I think his timetable is better addressed with Senator Baucus.  As I said yesterday, the President believes health care reform that lessens the cost for families and small businesses, improves outcomes in quality, and provides additional access to millions that don't currently have health insurance is long overdue for the American people.  The process with the White House will begin here Thursday with many stakeholders coming to discuss the future of health care reform and how we can get there, and bringing together people that have not always agreed on this issue -- but without getting into certain legislative timetables that somebody like Senator Baucus might set, only to say that the President believes that reform is long overdue.
     Q    So the President is not going to be saying we want it by this particular time?
     MR. GIBBS:  I don't want to get too far ahead of what the President will say on Thursday, but I think you'll see him enumerate principles that he believes are important, goals that he thinks can be met as we tackle the challenge of bringing about that important and fundamental reform.
     Mara.
     Q    I have a health care and an education question.  On health care, you seemed to have outlined an approach where the President is firm in his principles, as you just described them, and he's open to all ideas as to how we get to those principles.  Senator Baucus said today that he was open to the idea of either eliminating or reducing the tax deduction for employer-provided health care.  Is that one of the things that he would be open to?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think what the President will do here on Thursday and begin a long process to reform is ask people to talk about those ideas and to put many concepts on the table.  Whether or not I have daily reaction to each of those concepts, I doubt we'll have.
     Q    Well, I asked about the specific one, obviously, because it was a big issue in the campaign and he really pounded it pretty hard.
     MR. GIBBS:  Right.  I remember those --
     Q    But that one, he's open to -- everything is on the table, in other words?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I think it would be -- I think it's important that leading up to Thursday we ask people from a wide  spectrum, representing many viewpoints -- business and labor, providers, insurance companies, patients, doctors, Democrats, Republicans -- that we ask everybody to come and talk openly and freely about those ideas.  An approach that's open, an approach that has many that agree on an overall goal, but have to work out specifics, I think is important for the President to -- I think it's important for the President to demonstrate that he's open and willing to hear what people have to say as they talk through a complicated issue.
     Q    On education, there's a provision in the omnibus spending bill that would sunset the D.C. voucher plan, and I'm wondering -- there's been a lot of publicity about this brother and sister pair at Sidwell who uses their voucher money to pay for tuition at the same school the President chose to send his children.  I'm wondering if you could restate the President's opposition to the D.C. voucher program, and why he's against it.
     MR. GIBBS:  I would -- let me go -- I've not read the article today, if there is one.  I think the --
     Q    Well, it's just about two kids who use their voucher money to go to Sidwell.  Pretty basic.  (Laughter.) 
     MR. GIBBS:  Right.  I mean, I think -- right.  (Laughter.) 
     Q    I mean -- in other words, that --
     MR. GIBBS:  Why are you providing me the opportunity to be the middleman?  (Laughter.)  I mean, again, I think the --
     Q    Could you just restate the President's --
     MR. GIBBS:  I think the President has concerns about -- concerns about taking large amounts of funding out of the system to address this, that the President obviously believes -- and I think you'll hear him talk about and has talked about the need for reform in our educational system, but has not agreed with the program in the past.  I'll see if there's anything updated on that. 
     Q    Back on missile defense, the bar that you're setting in terms of eliminating nuclear weapons or the possibility of that in Iran seems to be a very high bar.  And I'm just wondering if you guys see it that way, as a very high bar.  How possible is that?  Even some think that the only way to do that at this point is a military strike.
     And lastly, what would be -- can you enumerate the specific ways that you think that Russia could possibly bring about that result?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, let me try to address some of these.  I think obviously working in concert with our European allies, working with Russia to help address the threat would be important not only in international institutions, but in international public opinion.  Look, the -- while the President has talked about the notion that we shouldn't take specific actions off the table, I think the President was outspoken in the campaign about the desire to, at appropriate times, engage not just our friends but our enemies in discussing ways to reduce particularly the threat of nuclear weapons and nuclear proliferation.
     That was something that was heavily debated in the campaign.  And the President believes we should use all elements of our national power to address this.  And I think obviously having the help and the cooperation of the Russians would be important in taking steps to reduce the threat.  Obviously, it's just one step and there are many to go.  But the President shares a grave concern about Iran acquiring nuclear weapons.
     Q    I just don't hear a lot of specifics there, though, about -- I mean, if we're going to -- I know you were saying it's not a quid pro quo, but if we're going to talk about eliminating the possibility, there has to be some pretty concrete ways in which we'll --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that that diplomacy and those actions were -- I think the Vice President outlined some stuff in Munich; I think our Ambassador -- I'm sorry, Ambassador Burns, who's at the State Department and visiting Moscow, has talked about this.  I don't want to get into -- I'm sure many of our diplomats would rather me not get into all of the back-and-forth in -- from right here.
     Jonathan.
     Q    Robert, the Chairman of the RNC, Michael Steele, on Saturday night criticized Rush Limbaugh.  He walked back that statement yesterday.  I'm just curious as to your view.  Why do you think that the Chairman apologized to Mr. Limbaugh?  And what do you think it says about the state of the GOP?  (Laughter.) 
     Q    Slow and above that -- (laughter.) 
     MR. GIBBS:  Yes.  Well, look, I talked about this yesterday.  I -- a little surprised at the reaction and the fervent reaction that Mr. Limbaugh got at -- from CPAC.  I've encouraged members of the press to ask Republicans whether they agree with Mr. Limbaugh's adage that he hopes that the President's economic ideas fail.  I was a little surprised at the speed in which Mr. Steele, the head of the RNC, apologized to the head of the Republican Party.  (Laughter.) 
     Thanks, guys. 
                                         END                         3:30 P.M. EST
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/4/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
____________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                                              March 4, 2009
PRESS BRIEFING BY 
PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS,
SECRETARY OF HOMELAND SECURITY JANET NAPOLITANO,
AND SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE TOM VILSACK
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
11:35 A.M. EST
     MR. GIBBS:  I know we're a little bit early today.  Sorry to throw a monkeywrench into everybody.
     Q    This is good.
     MR. GIBBS:  Early is good?  All right.
     Obviously you all heard the President speak today about continuing his own reform agenda relating to contracting and procurement and addressing wasteful spending in our government.  We thought it would be a perfect opportunity to highlight what's going on at some of the agencies right now.  And so I'm going to have you talk to Secretaries Vilsack and Napolitano about what they're doing at their respective departments, and they'll take a few questions.
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  Thanks very much.  It has obviously been an honor for me to serve the President in his Cabinet for many reasons, but one is his commitment to changing the way in which we do business in Washington.  He wants us to have a positive impact on people's lives, and in order to do that we need to focus on cutting wasteful, inefficient and unnecessary spending.
     We began that process immediately with the charge from the President to do so my first day in office.  We receive weekly reports.  We've asked the staff of every missionary of USDA to focus on reducing spending.
     In the first couple of weeks, we identified over $18 million in savings as we modernize our financial systems.  We're doing a better job of using modern technology to provide more transparency.  That allows us to avoid costly upgrades from older systems and provide more information on how best to manage USDA.  We're avoiding late payments; we're collecting resources that we're responsible to collect on a more timely basis.
     We're also utilizing technology to avoid unnecessary meetings.  Instead of people traveling all over the country, we are using technology to have people meet in their offices.  That has saved over $1.5 million in just the first couple of weeks.  And we have begun a process, a very elaborate process of reviewing each contract -- each procurement contract, each consulting contract -- to determine whether or not contracts that have been entered into are unnecessary or improper.  We have identified a number, the most recent of which was a $400,000 consulting contract which career employees felt was inappropriate.  That contract has been cancelled.  We're going to continue to do that every single week.
     We're anxious to live up to the expectations of the President and the people of this country.  This effort has energized staff, and they're looking at not just large items, but also very, very small items.  They recognize that people today are suffering in this country; they are looking at their budgets, they're trying to figure out how to reduce their spending, both large and small amounts, and they expect their government to do the same.  And we're happy to be part of that process.
     SECRETARY NAPOLITANO:  Well, thank you.  And like Secretary Vilsack, at the Department of Homeland Security we began early on identifying savings and cost avoidances that we could have to make sure that we were spending every dollar that we had wisely.
     We were building on a process that I began as governor of Arizona, where we started in what we called efficiency review, and identified over a billion dollars' worth of savings and cost avoidances -- and in our state over several years, where the state budget, all told, was around $10 billion per year.
     We are looking at things like fleet management, use of contract employees, employee travel and cross-training.  We've already identified examples where we can experience savings of taxpayer dollars and cost avoidances.  For example, expediting frequent travelers through the ports of entry, using technology over the long haul will save costs.
     In the stimulus package, there was money for the land ports of entry, to enlarge them and improve them.  Rather than have both the GSA and Customs and Border Protection working separately on building plans for those ports, they are going to co-locate one contracting office.  We've already identified at least $17 million in cost savings by doing that, simply for the ports that were actually included in the stimulus package.
     Increased use of technology allows us to reduce cost.  For example, in our science and technology unit we recently worked with the Secret Service, with industry and others, to digitize over 9,000 different types of ink samples.  Not only will that allow us to improve our investigation of criminal and terrorist activities, but it reduces matching time for prints from days to minutes.
     Like the Secretary of Agriculture, we will be looking very hard at our use of consultants, of contractors.  We'll also be looking at improving our acquisition and acquisition workforce so that we are monitoring contracts and contract compliance as we embark on what for many are very long-term projects that need to be done over time.
     So we look forward to working with the President and assuring the American people that the dollars that are being expended on stimulus are going where those dollars are intended, and that for the Department of Homeland Security they are going to their highest and best use.
     MR. GIBBS:  A couple of questions for these guys, anybody?
   
     Q    A question for Secretary Vilsack.  President Obama cited a few ag subsidies in his budget that he thought could be eliminated.  How many more do you think could be eliminated?  Obviously this is an area where a lot of government reform groups have said there's a lot of fat that could be trimmed.
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  This is a time when it's very important for us to maintain the safety net as we look at a number of producers.  I know that I receive probably a letter or two a day from ag groups indicating the stress; commodity prices have fallen just as stock prices have fallen.  And so it's important and necessary for us to maintain an appropriate safety net.
     As you all know, budgets are about choices, and you have to make some difficult choices.  We -- the President has made a number of difficult choices.  We need to make sure that those are implemented, monitor the implications of those steps, and then take the next step in the process.  I can't tell you today what that next step will be.  I want to see the impact of the steps that we've proposed.
     Q    Secretary Vilsack, on direct payments, there's been the predictable backlash from some people who don't want that to happen.  How confident are you that it will get through as proposed?
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  I think it's important for us to make the case and for the people of the country to understand that budgets are about choices and about a framework that the President has set forward.  And I think as we begin to educate folks about that framework and the choices that we had to make
-- I think it's a very important component of my budget that we're increasing resources for child nutrition.  I think Americans want that.  They want more nutritious school lunches and school breakfasts for their children.  They understand the connection with health care.
     As we begin to make that case, I think we will -- we will be successful making the case.  But it is up to us to make the case, and I am looking forward to doing that.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Thank you, Robert.  I would like to ask Secretary Vilsack and Secretary Napolitano, some of us who covered the previous administration recall the controversy about the outsourcing to the government of Dubai and the port.  Have you taken a look at any outsourcing to foreign countries, or is that increased under the reforms that you're laying out?
     SECRETARY NAPOLITANO:  Well, we have -- there's a process now called the CFIUS process, which identifies those sorts of issues such as the Dubai issue, for whether they do raise security concerns.  The bigger -- and that process is ongoing, and it has been ongoing for several years.  The bigger issue, however, is the amount of outsourcing and use of contractors.
     The Department of Homeland Security, of course, is very young, it's just barely six years old.  It was stood up so quickly that they used a lot of outside consultants and contractors.  One of the processes, one of the things we are going to focus on is what of that work can be done more efficiently, effectively and, indeed, more cheaply, by having actual full-time employees doing it.
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  The focus of USDA relative to other nations is to export American products to those other nations, so we're not as likely to have that kind of controversy or circumstance in USDA.
     We have offices in foreign countries, the purpose of which is to really promote American products in order to bolster trade, in order to create new opportunities for production of agriculture in this country.  So we are focused on that aspect.
     MR. GIBBS:  Major.
     Q    Secretary Vilsack, you talked about a $400,000 consulting contract deemed inappropriate.  What was inappropriate about it?  And just generally, to both of you, one of the problems in federal contracting is when you cancel a contract, sometimes a contract will sue the government because they disagree with the cancellation.  How do you end up saving the taxpayers money if you get involved in protracted litigation if it's not for cause?
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  Well, I don't want to go into great detail about this particular contract, other than to say that the career folks who watched this process unfold in the last waning days of this last administration were very concerned about the process, the connections and relationships between people receiving this half-a-million-dollar contract, and what they intended to do with the resource, which the career folks felt was unnecessary and inappropriate.
     They made a very strong and powerful case to me that the process wasn't followed as it should have been; their input was not valued as it should be.  We put a lot of confidence in people who have been through this process before, in terms of knowing precisely how best to use these tax dollars.  And this particular consulting contract -- I've looked at the details -- I didn't see any value to USDA from it.  I will tell you that it was rather startling to see that a substantial amount of money had already been spent on foreign travel, which, under the circumstances, we did not think was appropriate.
     In terms of litigation, I feel fairly confident on this one that we will prevail, and I'd be surprised if it's questioned.
     Q    Can you tell us, Mr. Secretary, who this involved and more details?  It sounds like a rather startling discovery that you've made, and taxpayers probably would like to know more about it.
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  Well, I think what taxpayers need to know is that every single department of government has now been charged by the President to review in detail the nature of contracts that we've entered into.  In order to do what American families are doing -- American families are sitting down today and trying to decide, how do we save money, how do we eliminate unnecessary spending -- their expectation is the government does the same.
     I don't want to get into details about this, but I will tell you that I think it's appropriate for us to do this.  I'm glad the President has instructed us to do this, and I think we'll probably continue to find savings.
     Q    But why not get into details?  This is government funds -- the public has a right to know, with all due respect.
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  I'm happy to share -- I don't want to step on protocol here -- I'm happy to share, if Mr. Gibbs expects it to be --
     Q    Transparent?  (Laughter.)
     MR. GIBBS:  Lay it out.  I'm all for it.
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  Well, it involves an individual by the name of Stan Johnson who had a close connection with the previous administration.  It was a consulting contract for half a million dollars; a substantial amount of money was spent for foreign travel.  To be honest with you, we saw very little, if any, value to the USDA.  And a number of career folks were very concerned about how the process unfolded.  And had their input been valued, the contract would not have been entered into.
     Q    Is this like a favoritism thing, Mr. Secretary?
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  You know, I don't know about that.  I don't know.  I just know that there was a close connection.  It was a contract that I think was unnecessary, and I know the career people were very concerned about the way in which it unfolded.
     Q    Consulting on what issue, sir?  Consulting on what issue?
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  Well, that's a good question, and I can't answer it.
     Q    Can we get more details from your department later?
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  Yes, be happy to.
     Q    Did Johnson have any connection to the Bush administration or the department previous to the awarding of the contract?
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  I doubt that he did.  Actually, he used to work at Iowa State University.  (Laughter.)
     Q    Mr. Secretary, can you just say one thing, as far as U.S. and India relations between USDA and agriculture, in the past there was a Green Revolution in the '60s and now they are talking about second revolution.  What's going on between the two countries now as far as that is concerned?
     SECRETARY VILSACK:  Well, we're very familiar with the circumstances of the Green Revolution.  Dr. Borlaug, an Iowa native educated in Minnesota and really a great American, was the father of that Green Revolution.  It helped to save hundreds of millions of lives.  We are now challenged as the world population continues to grow and the amount of land available to plant continues to shrink with developing communities and cities.  We are challenged to find the science that will allow us to continue increasing productivity.
     I am confident, in discussions I've had with a number of major agri businesses, that we are doing the science.  We're working hard to make sure that folks understand the safety and security that we take into consideration as this science is being developed.
     Production agriculture is one of the great miracles of American -- of the American experience.  Today, 125,000 farms in America today produce 75 percent of all that we eat and much of what we export.  So it's a challenge, but we're up to it.
     MR. GIBBS:  Thanks, guys.  We're going to get back to our regularly scheduled programming.  (Laughter.)  We thank the Secretaries for coming.
     Q    Thank you.
     Q    Come back.  (Laughter.)
     MR. GIBBS:  Let me get a little bit more organized here.  Let's go -- yes, ma'am.
     Q    Thank you.  I'm wondering if you can respond to some of the criticism coming from Republicans in increasing amounts and with increasing intensity, essentially calling the President, you know, a tax-and-spend administration and coming very close, if not crossing the line, of calling him a hypocrite on this idea of wasteful spending and cutting back on spending when he's proposing the budget that he has and the kinds of expensive programs that he is.
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think my first advice would be to read the budget.  I think if you look at the plan that the President rolled out and the plan that the President got through Congress for economic recovery, you'll see tax cuts for 95 percent of working families.  You'll see a plan that cuts a deficit that was completely out of control in half over four years, provides tax cuts, again, for 95 percent of working families, institutes some fairness, gets our economy going again.
     It is always interesting to see the religion some groups get when someone new comes to town.  I think we watched spending skyrocket over the course of the past eight years.  I think many Americans have rightfully asked what we got for that, because we've not made any investments in many of the important things to lay the foundation for future economic growth -- as the President laid out in his address -- be it reforming our health care system, reducing our dependence on foreign oil, or beginning to invest in 21st century classrooms.
     I think that -- I would add one more thing.  If the best way to demonstrate for the American people that you're going to make the investments in their needs, do so honestly by accounting for paying for our endeavors in Iraq and Afghanistan, budgeting for future natural disasters, I think there's certainly every opportunity for any member of Congress to put forward a complete budget that demonstrates in full transparency exactly how they'd like to see it done.  And I think it would be interesting to put some of those budgets side by side.  We've encouraged them to do that.
     Q    Is there any sense in which pushing back against this Republican narrative is driving message or strategy, or even the kinds of events you might schedule here?
     MR. GIBBS:  How so?
     Q    You decide to do an event on waste; maybe that's to push back against the narrative that you hear coming from these folks.   
     MR. GIBBS:  I mean, we, in a planning meeting many days ago, decided to do -- trust me, I wish that I had more of my weekends and we were planning Wednesdays on Tuesday nights.  But, regrettably, that's not how we did things on the campaign, and don't do things now.
     I think what may be frustrating to many Republicans in Congress is they finally have somebody in town who's willing to address wasteful spending.  They finally have somebody in town who's willing to provide a tax cut for the American people that need it.  There's finally somebody in town that's willing to undergo honest budgeting.  I guess for them it just came a few years too late.
     Q    Can you preview tomorrow's event on health care?  Can you talk about what the President hopes to accomplish and how this will feed into the effort to get legislation on the Hill --
     MR. GIBBS:  Just broadly, to give you an event description, the White House Forum on Health Care Reform will take place, as you know, here at the White House tomorrow.  We expect there will be a few more than 120 participants.  The President will open the forum and participants will break out into several groups to discuss ideas on ways to reform the system, bring down costs, and expand coverage.  The President will then reassemble participants in a closing session.  And the event will be streamed on the web and broadcast on C-SPAN, as the President promised many times during the campaign.
     As I said yesterday, I think it's an opportunity to bring divergent views and divergent viewpoints in terms of constituencies that are represented, all of whom have a stake in health care reform -- bringing that group together to discuss how to move forward.  As I said again yesterday, the President doesn't go in with anything more than the notion that he hopes people will bring their ideas, whatever those ideas may be, and that they be put on the table and discussed, and that this process begin.
     Q    How involved is he going to be, and how involved is the White House going to be, in setting out what should be in the legislation?  Is he going to let the Hill take the lead on that, or are there certain things that are not negotiable?
     MR. GIBBS:  I think many of the committees on the Hill are going to take the lead on exactly what will be in health care reform.  Obviously this White House will work with Democrats and Republicans on that.  But I think there's maybe a tendency to get ahead of ourselves here.  This is the first -- sort of the opening argument, if you will.  And the President looks forward to meeting with the participants and discussing their viewpoints.  This is not, obviously, going to be done overnight.  But I think this is a good first step in starting a process that the President believes is long overdue.
     Q    What do you say to --
     Q    The whole thing -- the whole thing including the breakout sessions?
     MR. GIBBS:  I believe that is true.  That's what I have here.
     Q    What do you say to those who say this is overly ambitious to try to do this in a year where you're grappling with more immediate --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, as I said, I -- in many ways, my response to the question of the budget -- we have waited for far too long to address health care reform, and we've watched families struggle with it.  As the President said during his speech to Congress, a family declares bankruptcy and loses their home every 30 seconds because they get sick.  Businesses are struggling with the skyrocketing cost of health care.  And the budget -- our budget, state budgets, family budgets, business budgets -- are being overwhelmed by these costs.
     I guess we could wait another few years, as families in this country have waited for quite some time, for somebody to step forward and take control and bring down health care costs.  But the President has decided that instead of waiting, as has been done before, he's going to step forward and try to do that starting now.
     Jake.
     Q    Secretary Vilsack, just moments ago, spoke about saving $18 million in savings on modernizing financial systems, $400,000 by canceling a consulting contract.  And he spoke very movingly about everybody is tightening their belts in this nature and, therefore, the government needs to do so.  You probably know where I'm heading with this.  The President is going to sign a bill, the spending bill, which contains $8 billion in earmarks.  Democrats in the Senate are now calling for the President to, if not make an effort to have it stripped in the Senate, to veto the bill.  Evan Bayh has an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal today.
     I don't fully understand this argument that this is -- we're moving forward.  This bill hasn't even come to the President's desk yet.  If you guys are really serious, why not take the bull by the horns and get this stuff out of the omnibus spending bill?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me try again, what we've talked about before.  This is the culmination of the legislative business from the previous fiscal year and the previous Congress.  The President is greatly concerned, and I think that shows in the efforts that he's taken to illuminate through transparency and accountability wasteful spending and earmarks in legislation.  That's why he put his on the Internet.  That's why he hasn't asked for any in the past few years.  The President believes that we can work with Congress to reduce wasteful spending in the future.
     Q    Why not now?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, we are --
     Q    This isn't a legislation -- I guess -- you make it sound as if the legislation is written and it's just waiting for him to sign, and it's not.  It's being worked on right now on Capitol Hill.  It's in the progress of being assembled.  So it's not that he comes to office and this is outstanding business.
     MR. GIBBS:  Well -- well, it is outstanding business in the sense that typically appropriations bills are done before half the fiscal year is over.
     Q    Right, but it's not too late to, like, tell Harry Reid, if you send this to me with this $8 billion ---
     MR. GIBBS:  I think as I said before, Jake, that the President will lay out some very clear objectives on how we move forward.  There will be, over the course of the next several years, dozens and dozens of appropriations bills that cross his desk.  And we'll change the rules going forward, understanding that we have to deal with last year's business.
     Chip.
     Q    On housing, White House and Treasury officials today laid out details on how their -- how the $75 billion housing mortgage foreclosure plan is going to work.  And one big element of that is to -- that's a direct response to the backlash that a lot of people had not just on cable, but a lot of people had about fearing that people who behaved badly will be rewarded.
   
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, just let me -- before you finish your question -- I think that was the objective of the plan as the team met to create it, starting in November.  I think it's what Secretary Geithner and Secretary Donovan spoke about at the event in which the President in Phoenix unveiled that policy.
     The idea of -- and I've said this to many of you before --  I was struck reading drafts of the speech when the President makes very clear, this is not going to save every person's home.  The plan is not intended to take somebody's house -- or to augment somebody's loan for a house that they couldn't afford under any economic situation, good or bad.  The President laid out a plan that for the very first time offers help for those that have played by the rules and acted responsibly.
     So I'll let you finish your question.  But I just -- I think it's important to understand the objective of this plan wasn't written post some rant to two dozen people watching a cable show.  This was done at the inception of something dating back to November.
     Q    But now we have details of this plan.  And if there's any way you could walk us through how the specific details -- and I don't know if you're up on it -- I hope you are, but I don't -- if you could walk us through how the new details are going to keep bad behavior and bad actors from being rewarded.
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think simply to apply for some of these, you have to have an updated -- your most recent tax return. You've got to show in much different and more broad ways -- broader ways -- proof of income.
     We've all read stories about people that wash through loans based on somebody coming to them and, without any proof or identification, saying, oh, yeah, I make -- I cut grass and I make $135,000 a year and I want to buy a $500,000 home.  And -- do what?
     Q    -- cutting grass.  (Laughter.)
     MR. GIBBS:  And somebody signing a loan agreement.  The plan that -- the details of which as you said were unfurled today, and as the Secretaries mentioned in Phoenix -- will take steps to ensure that there's a process by which people won't be able to game the system.  There's a cap on, as the Secretaries talked about, a cap for the amount of conforming loans, so that this isn't for somebody who, again, may have some means but bought a house far larger than one they could ever hope to afford.  They've, I think, released the details of a plan that, again, rewards people that played by the rules and ensures that the system can't continue to be gamed by people who can't afford the house they're in because they never were going to be able to do that.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Robert, on wasteful spending, because such a high bar has been set, will various government agencies be forced to hire additional personnel to weed out fraud?  Or is this -- are we talking about existing staff will be dealing with this?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think it's early to talk about -- the story from yesterday -- to talk about the extent to which new people might be needed in government agencies.  Obviously -- I mean, the President talked today about, in procurement reform, GAO reports that are done that identify a lot of this stuff that just are sitting around and nobody's acting on them.
The President here obviously is proud of the legislation that was passed by Congress to help to kickstart the economy, and obviously is dedicating their resources both in that legislation and in -- the President is committed to dedicating those resources to ensure that the money -- that the American people have confidence in the way that money is spent; that contracting is done appropriately; that the money that, again, that the taxpayers have given to get this economy moving again is done in a way that they can have confidence in.  And that's what the President and the entire team throughout this government are committed to.
     Q    On the housing plan, will the refis and the loan modifications, will these be free to homeowners or will they have to pay a certain percentage for the loan amount?
     MR. GIBBS:  I will get some more details on that from Treasury.  I don't know the exact answer to that question off the top of my head.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Back on health care.  The President this morning, and you just now, talked about the state of the economy as adding urgency to the need to get this thing done.  But to what extent does that also complicate the attempt to get it done this year?  Are you worried about making changes to a big sector of the economy at a time when your economists, the CEA says that the economy should be in recovery into next year and into trying to dig out of where they are now?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think many of the people that are going to come to the forum tomorrow that represent many of those industries understand that it's time for, and that they understand and welcome reform.  I think you'll see people tomorrow that may have been on different sides of this issue the last time this town was involved in a larger discussion on health care reform.
     I mean, I think you can all go through and see stories of those involved that -- things like businesses, that have understood that the crushing cost of health care has to be addressed.  I think that's what the President wants to start tomorrow.
     Look, the President would probably tell you this on the issue of health care, or virtually any other, that change is never going to be easy and it's never going to come easily.  But for far too long the attitude here I think has been, this is too hard; we can't do this now; we can kick this can down the road.  But if you look at -- going back to the budget question -- the way the amount of money that we're spending on things like Medicare and Medicaid are increasing exponentially, we don't have the option of kicking the can down the road.
     We have to take some bold steps at reform now to ensure that we have a system that works not just for the taxpayers of this government but for the families and businesses that they also are a part of.
   
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Back to contracting.  Probably every modern President has talked about going after waste, fraud and abuse.  The biggest numbers cited in the budget outline are the growth in contracting under the Bush administration.  Most of that is privatization; that's handing over government functions, vital government functions to private contractors.  Does the President have any specific goal to roll back privatization?  And does he have a companion goal to increase government employment to ramp up the capacity to do the jobs that contractors do today?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, but understand that -- I think you're positing a bit of an either/or scenario when I think the President would tell you that there can be a both/and scenario.  Not every contract that's private has to be done at something that everybody realizes is an expense that's so grossly over what is the bounds of common sense.  I mean, you know, we can go back to -- go back to Katrina.  Go back to some of the contracts that were let around that.  Secretary Napolitano talked about the fact that DHS -- fairly new in its inception -- the President worked on this as an issue with somebody as different politically as probably could be from him in Tom Coburn, in addressing no-bid contracts and the way that contracts have been let specifically for non-emergency appropriations.
     Q    But is there an interest in rolling back privatization, separate from going after waste and fraud?
     MR. GIBBS:  Without getting into sort of the catchphrases of whether it's privatization or increased employment on one side, I think the President takes the viewpoint that he wants to go through and identify any possible scenario in which money can be saved -- finding out whether, as he talked about today, in defense procurement, are there ways that we can do this that continue his sole mission of keeping this country safe, but doing so in a way that makes far more sense for the taxpayers that we're trying to protect.
     Q    Beyond cost savings, is there a goal for more government employment, and less privatization?
     MR. GIBBS:  Again, I think you're positing a scenario that is not the way the President looks at the problem.
     Q    -- talked to union leaders about it during the campaign, right?
     MR. GIBBS:  Right.  Well, but again -- again, I think you're setting up a scenario where the only way to save money is to hire people to do it here.  The President is not interested in a monetary shell game on contracting.  The President, as was demonstrated in today's remarks and by the -- what he's asked people in his administration to do is find that waste, cut it, and save money.
   
     Q    Robert, on the spending bill, a moment ago you said that the President wants to change the rules going forward.  Does that mean on earmarks?
     MR. GIBBS:  That's what we talked about earlier, yes.
     Q    So do you have any response to Steny Hoyer's comments yesterday?  It sounded like he was telling the President to butt out on earmarks.  He said, "I don't think the White House has the ability to tell us what to do."
     MR. GIBBS:  I saw those remarks.  I think the next sentence was, he reminded -- he wanted to make sure you all wrote down the previous sentence.
     Q    I did.  (Laughter.)
     MR. GIBBS:  Look, I -- the President believes the best way to reduce wasteful spending is to work with Congress in order to do that.  We've seen through the -- out the past few years that the amount and the number of earmarks in legislation has been cut significantly.  The President believes we can do ever more and looks forward to working with Congress to ensure that that happens.
   
     Q    Robert, two quick questions on health care.  The outreach tomorrow sounds very similar to the outreach that -- in the run-up to the stimulus recovery bill.  We all know that most Republicans who were targets of those earlier efforts walked away feeling like they were not really -- their issues were not really taken into account.
     MR. GIBBS:  I think you've already -- you may have already fast-forwarded through what they're going to discuss tomorrow and come to a conclusion.  I think that -- I think the President might want to have that discussion before we decide whether or not it works or not.
     Q    To what extent can you -- what can you say to the people, the guests, that this time the process will have a different ending?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, the different ending is in some ways up to the participants that come to the White House.  We've talked about this, and I'll certainly do it one more time:  The President believes that outreach to those with differing opinions was a good idea.  It may not show immediate results, but the President thinks that's the best way to move forward.
     I would -- I might point out if I was a discerning reader that many media organizations represented in this august room have come back with opinion polling that shows the American people seem to agree that the President did the right thing in reaching out to members of the other party.  He's going to continue to do that.
     Q    The other quick question is, the last time you mentioned the last big major effort in health care reform -- has the White House consulted, or has there been any input from the person who led this last effort?  If not, why not?
     MR. GIBBS:  See Mara Liasson.  (Laughter.)  You know, I don't know if they have had wide-ranging conversations specifically with Secretary Clinton.  Obviously a number of people -- there are still a number of people around that were part of that effort that can be consulted.  I think even those involved in previous efforts would acknowledge misgivings that they had about the way the process worked, and I think tomorrow's effort is intended to bring about a process that people can be assured is open, is transparent, and solicits the viewpoints not just of people that may share the belief of the President, but share differing or opposing viewpoints, or have different ideas about how one gets to the same outcome or conclusion.
     I think that what's probably most important about tomorrow is that it's the beginning of a long and arduous process, but one that can be done in a way that brings all of those stakeholders together.
   
     Major.
     Q    Robert, you just said a moment ago congressional committees will take the lead on health care reform.  But you've also said from the podium that the President's campaign plan on health care is his general philosophical starting point.  Could you just reconcile those two?  I mean, you're telling them to start on the basis --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I'll reconcile it by this:  The President isn't going to send a plan up in the form of a piece of legislation to start going through those committees.  The President is going to talk about how -- some goals and some outlines and principles that he and others would like to see met.
     But I think he's also -- Major, you've probably heard him say, if somebody shares the outcome of health care reform with him and has a better idea of how to do it, one that will save money, bring reform to the system, result in better outcomes and healthier people, he's more than happy and willing to look at it and sign onto it.
     Q    Along the idea front -- this is a quick, lightning round -- (laughter) -- the President wants more children covered, right?  The President wants all children covered, correct?
     MR. GIBBS:  Correct.
     Q    And if that -- if a mandate or a financial penalty is required to achieve that, he's in favor of that?
     MR. GIBBS:  Let's not get --
     Q    He said so during the campaign.
     MR. GIBBS:  I understand.  But just as I just said --
     Q    You don't want to prejudge even that?
     MR. GIBBS:  I think it's important that the participants in tomorrow's health care forum have a chance to come and discuss those ideas.
     Q    So there's flexibility on something he campaigned on, in this regard?
     MR. GIBBS:  The President will welcome many people tomorrow to the White House to begin the long process of health care reform and welcomes all of their ideas.  And as I just said, if those ideas result in an outcome that's a better way of doing it --
     Q    But ideas have to follow the outcome sought.  And I'm just asking if the outcome sought by the President to have every child covered and if they can't be covered without a penalty, is he in favor of imposing one -- because he said he was during the campaign.
     MR. GIBBS:  And as I said, let's have that discussion.  I think it would be -- let me -- I'm going to bring Ed back into this -- I think it would be a little premature for the President to invite a bunch of people to come down and tell everybody what the outcome is --
     Q    But you said to us --
     MR. GIBBS:  Hold on, hold on, hold on.  I know, hold on --
     Q    -- many times from the podium that what he said during the campaign matters.
     MR. GIBBS:  Can I interrupt during the lightning round?  Okay.  I don't know if the lights go off and I get a little bit longer yellow from somebody in the back of the room that might control those lights.  Before we get into -- luckily, the President isn't going to do a lightning round tomorrow.  The President isn't going to stand up there with a slide show or a Power Point and say, yes, no, no, yes, yes, no -- and then ask 120 people to come discuss the outcomes in which he's already decided.
     I think the President believes and understands that there are many ideas to get to this solution.  Some of them have been discussed by people that agree with him; some of the have been discussed by people that disagree with him.  The hope is to get all of those people in the room and talk best about how to get to the ultimate outcome of reforming our health care system, reducing those costs, expanding the access that's available to millions of Americans, that will hopefully result in far better outcomes.  I think that's the goal tomorrow.
     Q    Does the President want every adult covered?
     MR. GIBBS:  I think he'll cover that tomorrow.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Does the President support the arrest warrant issued today against President Bashir of Sudan?  And how is the administration planning for the possibility of retaliation as a result of this against Darfurians, a possible collapse of the peace in the south, and international workers in Sudan?
   
     MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- without getting specifically into this, the White House believes that those who have committed atrocities should be held accountable; that as this process moves forward, that we would urge restraint on the part of all parties, including the government of Sudan; that further violence against civilian Sudanese or foreign interests is to be avoided and won't be tolerated.  The President and this White House are determined to support the pursuit of an immediate cease-fire and long-term peace in the region.  Obviously there are many efforts that are ongoing in the region to help those that have been displaced, and the President believes those efforts should and must continue.
     Q    So he does support the ICC's --
     MR. GIBBS:  I'm not going to go farther than what I just said.
     Q    Specifically back to the earmarks, as Jake was asking, why will this not make it more difficult to, next year or in subsequent years, to keep earmarks out of the bills, if the President is allowing it now?
     MR. GIBBS:  Again, I think -- as I said, I think the President will outline ways moving forward that he thinks are the best set of practices for the dozens and dozens of appropriations bills that will come his way over the course of his presidency.
     Q    Does he find any of these specific projects in this bill hard to swallow at all, or is he just --
     MR. GIBBS:  I don't know that the President has looked through the bill to enumerate the specifics of the --
     Q    Robert, briefly on contracting, where did the $40 billion figure come from?  Did he get an agency-by-agency breakdown on that?
     MR. GIBBS:  Let me double-check on that.  I think there's figures on that.
     Q    And he's convinced that he can get -- continue to get those savings even after he has instituted these new rules, that they're going to continue to turn up more places --
     MR. GIBBS:  I think there's no shortage of -- as I said, I think there's no shortage of IG and GAO reports that demonstrate ways that we can more efficiently bring about reform in this government, and better ways to ensure that the money that's spent on behalf of taxpayers is done so in a way that isn't wasteful.  That's what -- and again, that's not just an endeavor in this budget or in defense procurement, but is also important in the President's recovery plan and in many of his ideas moving forward.  We are struggling with a massive budget deficit.  Everybody is going to have to make tough choices and we're going to have to find far greater efficiencies in how this government operates.
     Ann.
     Q    Does the President support line-item veto?  It was introduced again in Congress today.  And did he support it when he was a senator?
     MR. GIBBS:  I can certainly check on what statements he made when he was a senator.  The legislation that Senators Feingold, McCain and Congressman Ryan talked about today, I don't know that the White House has reviewed -- again, certainly legislation that might go through Congress and give him certain or increased powers as it relates to that is something that Congress will have to deal with.
     Q    Does he want the power?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think what the President wants is to be able to -- as he outlined today -- with Democrats and Republicans, work with Congress to reduce the amount of wasteful spending that we have each year.  That's the best way to go out and do this, to continue to look for the inefficiencies and the waste, to follow prescribed solutions for this that in many cases have been identified and just simply not acted on.
     Q    So he does not want line-item veto power?  (Laughter.)
     MR. GIBBS:  I should never have let Major do the lightning round.  (Laughter.)
     Mara.
     Q    I want to ask a question about the bank bailout.  But I want to follow up on Ann, because he'd be the first President I think ever who didn't want it.  I mean, that would be really something if he didn't want it.
     Q    Exactly.
     MR. GIBBS:  Look, if they want to send it down, the President will use it.
     Q    Oh, in other words, he will accept it if they give it to him, but he's not asking for it?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I will certainly ask him if he's asking for it.
     Q    He talks of going through the budget line by line a lot, and he can't really do that unless he has the veto power.
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, but there's also --
     Q    He said he wanted to take it out for a test drive.
     MR. GIBBS:  Yes, and like I said, he wouldn't turn it down.  Whether or not you can find something -- I mean, obviously, the  -- you see the specifics of how the proposal was rolled out today.  It's different than what was done in the mid to late '90s that the Supreme Court ruled wasn't constitutional.
     Q    Okay, if it's constitutional, obviously.
     MR. GIBBS:  You know, that little Constitution thing.  (Laughter.)  Yes, obviously, I don't want to -- I guess I should have been more clear that we seek to take only constitutional ideas out for said test drive, yes.
     Q    I want to ask my question about the bank bailout.  You've been asked this before, but it's been three weeks since Tim Geithner said that he'd be back with details when he had them, and he didn't want to rush out with them just to get them wrong --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, hold up, Mara.  I don't know -- did you do a story yesterday on the business and lending initiative from the Treasury?
     Q    Okay, that's one piece of it.  But what I'm asking about in terms of toxic assets and in terms of the kind of comprehensive plan that a lot of people in the business community have been waiting for, I'm wondering if you could explain -- you know, there's been a lot of theories put forward as to why he hasn't -- either he doesn't have enough help at the Treasury because he doesn't have the staff, or because it's just simply so complicated and tough to do, or because they don't want to bite the bullet of having to nationalize some of these banks.
     I'm wondering why so far we've seen this ad hoc approach, a little bit more for Citi, a little bit more for AIG.  Should we expect at some point a comprehensive, detailed proposal about how to do this?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think -- let me flood your inbox as soon as I get done from here with many of the things that the Secretary has talked about, as I said, including yesterday, an effort to increase consumer and business lending in conjunction with the Fed and private investors that when fully implemented will result in a trillion-dollar lending capacity.
     I'll also send you the updated home foreclosure details that many on -- many of those businesses, I believe, share the belief that is a great cause of what we see each day.  I guess
--
     Q    But specifically on the toxic assets --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that they're continuing to work on, as he outlined, the public/private partnerships.  I mean, obviously -- and as I mentioned this yesterday, I think there's  -- there are some that would like us to come in on a constitutionally approved white horse and take all the bad assets at the value in which some people believe those assets are worth but the taxpayers might not agree with that value.
     I think the Treasury Department, the Fed, the FDIC and all those involved have continued to work on and institute increased financial stability to get -- to loosen up credit and lending in order to get our economy moving again.  I think we took a big step forward yesterday and today on those proposals, and I think we'll see results.
     Q    The Republicans are criticizing the White House for engaging in the Rush Limbaugh issue.  I wanted to raise a somewhat separate issue on this, as well, because --  
     MR. GIBBS:  Don't engage me, because then I get criticized.  (Laughter.)
     Q    Well, you and the President have used the term "cable chatter" a lot.  You guys have kind of derided that.  You've also said -- I've heard administration officials deride sort of superficial food-fight political reporting.  But you've repeatedly engaged from the podium here with CNBC reporters, as well as Rush Limbaugh, which seems to feed that very process you're criticizing.  It seems a little hypocritical.
     MR. GIBBS:  It may be counterproductive.  (Laughter.)  I'll give you that.  Look, are there days in which I just turn my television off?  Yes.  (Laughter.)  I wish I had a radio -- maybe I should just hook my iPod up.
     Look, there are days in which, yes, your head throbs from listening to arguments that aren't necessarily centered on delving into some important issue, but finding two people at completely opposite ends of the spectrum to yell loudest in a seven-minute segment before we go on to something else.
     Q    Shouldn't the White House lead the way, then, in elevating the discourse?
     MR. GIBBS:  We won't kick the cable people out of the briefing room.  I'm certainly opposed to doing something as radical an idea as that.  Look, it's out there; we deal with it.  I don't -- I certainly criticize it, and I even occasionally watch it.  I don't know if that makes me -- like I said, whether it makes me hypocritical or not, I certainly believe that feeding it undoubtedly -- I'll plead guilty to counter-productivity.
     Q    Can I ask about Gordon Brown's speech?  Did the President or you see the speech before the Congress?  And do you have any comments?  It was a very strong, pro-American speech.
     MR. GIBBS:  I didn't see the speech.  I don't know that the President saw it; I don't know that anybody at the NSC saw it.  I think, as the President said yesterday, we share a very special relationship with Great Britain, and we face many common challenges, whether it's dealing with the economy and financial regulations, or our commitment in Afghanistan, or making the energy that we use cleaner for our children.  That's an agenda that they talked about yesterday and one that we think, as part of the special relationship, we can make progress on.
     Thank you.
                                           END                12:28 P.M. EST
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/5/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                               March 5, 2009
 
PRESS BRIEFING
BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
2:55 P.M. EST
MR. GIBBS:  How's everyone today?  Good.  I apologize, my voice is a little on the scratchy side, but we'll muddle through.
At the conclusion -- or later on today, you're going to get -- you'll get a quick statement from us just announcing something that Secretary Clinton talked about a little bit ago on her trip that President and Mrs. Obama will visit the United Kingdom, France, Germany and the Czech Republic March 31st through April 5th of this year.  So be on the lookout for that.  Obviously that's a combination of the G20 meeting and the NATO event, as well.
So, with that, I will take a few questions.
Q    Yes, Robert.  I wanted to follow up on a couple of points the President made today.  One of his comments was that those who seek to block any reform at any cost will not prevail this time around in the health care debate.  Could you explain who he's talking about there?  Who does he mean when he says, those who are trying to block reform at any cost?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that many times health care reform has been tried, and many times health care reform has failed, based on any number of things. 
Sometimes it's -- it's special interests.  But what we have to do and what the President believes strongly is that we can -- we cannot wait for health care reform any longer; that we have to do all that we can.  And I think today's event was an important start in that process.  I think many people have written today in stories about a number of people that opposed health care reform 15 years ago, 15 or so years ago, were in a room today with others that wanted health care reform working together to try to come to a solution.  The President wanted to get stakeholders involved from differing viewpoints, representing different constituencies, into the same room to begin this process, understanding that there are shared goals, but there may be differences as to how to achieve them.  I think that's why this process -- the beginning of this process was so important.
Q    You've said that the goal is to have this done by the end of the year.  I understand that as a goal, but can you explain why, given the history and the complexity to this, why that's feasible, how that's feasible?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I think it's feasible largely because we can't wait for it to happen.  The problem has only gotten more intense over the past few years.  Getting sick eats into people's retirements.  It's eating into the federal budget.  It affects millions of families that are watching the cost of their health care skyrocket.  And he believes that all the stakeholders are poised and ready to act, and I think that's why today was an important first step in ensuring that that process moves forward.
It's ambitious, but as the President has said and as we've noted, that for quite some time we've -- we've run up huge deficits, we've spent money we didn't have, and didn't get anything for it.  This President has decided that we're going to make tough choices and invest in health care and education and energy independence in order to ensure sustained long-term economic growth.  And one of the only ways we're going to do that is to deal with the health care problem.
Yes, sir.
Q    General Motors says its auditors have raised doubts about its ability to survive without bankruptcy, and now General Electric says that it may have -- may face a cut in its credit rating, which raises some concern that it might have to also resort to federal bailout money.  What is the administration's level of concern about these -- the problems of these two definitely heavyweights?  And with new problems of this sort cropping up by the day, is there any consideration that the level -- the amount of money that is being -- that's being allocated to financial bailout may not be adequate?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me -- let me try to address many of those questions, break them off a little bit.
Obviously I don't think it comes as a big surprise to many that the auto industry is in crisis.  I think if you look at the plans that were submitted recently by GM and Chrysler, and certainly if you look at last month's auto sales, you understand the level and the depth of the crisis that the auto industry is in.
But it's also important to understand that it's not just GM and Chrysler.  Toyota sales were down 40 or so percent from the corresponding point a year earlier.  They've asked the Japanese government for help.
The rate at which cars are being sold right now is -- it's hard to sustain.  It is important that we take a number of steps.  I've told you quite a bit about the Economic Recovery and the Reinvestment Plan.  The best way to get people back to buying cars is to put them to work, see their wages go up, put some money back in their pockets. 
The team that the President assembled, the task force on autos, has been meeting round the clock to come up with a solution to this crisis.  They continue to meet, and are working towards what's likely to be a restructured and retooled auto industry in this country.  I think there's no doubt that all the stakeholders involved are going to have to give in order to ensure that that restructuring takes place.  But I think the President was very clear in his speech to Congress that a strong auto industry is of great importance to this country.
In terms of -- I have not seen the comments from GE.  As it relates to just the overall pot of money, I think the President, again, spoke to that when he spoke to Congress last week, the necessary need -- the likely need that there could be more money out there needed, and a placeholder certainly, based on the honest accounting in our budget, to ensure that that's accounted for.
You know, the team continues to assess what's out there on any number of industries and make decisions in conjunction with the President.  But I don't think there's any doubt we need a strong auto industry in this country.
Jake.
Q    Senator Baucus, who obviously will play an important role in the formulation of health care policy, said that he has concerns, it's an issue, the tax increase that you guys are proposing when it comes to itemized deductions.  You've said everything is on the table when it comes to health care.  Are you willing to consider a different revenue stream than that tax increase to fund health care?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I do think all issues are on the table.  Obviously that was a major -- a major part of the event today, and the ideas that we hope will be gathered from it.  Let's, though, just discuss the -- I assume you're talking about the charitable contribution --
Q    The itemized deductions for mortgage and --
MR. GIBBS:  I mean, a middle-class family donates a dollar to charity, they get 15 cents off their income tax; Bill Gates donates a dollar to charity, he takes 35 cents off his income tax.  The proposal that the White House has would simply reduce those levels to the same levels that we saw during the Reagan administration. 
So I think certainly that's important to understand.  But the broader issue of whether all ideas are on the table I think is one that the President brought to this and wanted to hear -- wants to hear from all of those involved as to what their ideas are.
I think it's going to be important to have that free flow and that exchange of ideas, to have this debate in an open and transparent way. 
Q    So you're willing to reconsider --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President is correct in saying that he's listening to all the ideas that people bring to the table.
Q    Can I just do one quick follow-up on health care?  You guys have talked a lot, and the President today even talked a lot about not repeating the mistakes of the past when it came to the way that then-First Lady Clinton went about her health care task force.  Do you think it's possible to learn that lesson too much, in the sense that, if you just leave things up to Congress without intimate involvement that that might cause a problem, too?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that a demonstration of today's event underscores that this President will be involved, the White House will be involved, Congress will be involved -- but also lots of stakeholders will be involved in this.  I think that the importance of having this done in a transparent way, bringing people together who have had differing ideas, come at this from different viewpoints in the past, is important.
I don't think this will be -- I don't think health care is going to be solved by, nor will be it left up to, one single entity to come up with a solution.  I think everybody involved is going to have to take part in this in order to move this process forward and for Americans to finally see a cut in the cost of their house care and -- health care, and have their health care reformed.
Yes.
Q    Robert, the President has been outspoken that in these tough times, business leaders have to be careful about going to Vegas or Florida for the Super Bowl for their annual conferences and conventions and whatnot.  So what do you think about the labor leaders at the AFL-CIO down in Miami this week, having their convention at a resort?
MR. GIBBS:  I haven't given it a whole lot of thought.
Q    Well, the Vice President is down there giving a speech, and spent taxpayer money to go down there.  Labor Secretary Solis went down there.  So the President's concern was that business leaders may be using taxpayer money in these lean times.  The Vice President and Labor Secretary both went down to Miami Beach to this resort. 
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think obviously, as we talk about creating jobs in this country, labor is certainly an important part of that.  I also think you've gotten the notice the -- the Vice President, excuse me, is also down there to announce an increase in mass transit funding as part of the Reinvestment and Recovery Act the President asked for and that Congress passed.  I think those activities and his participation is obviously appropriate.
Chip.
Q    A quick follow-up on Jake's question that -- a comparison to the stimulus bill.  Would the stimulus bill -- I think it was fairly similar, that you sent up a set of principles and goals rather than filling in all the details, and leading Democrats in Congress put together a bill that completely turned off virtually all the Republicans.  Do you run the risk of that happening this time, that the Democrats write a bill -- and, if it turns off Republicans, it could also turn off the insurers and the hospitals and all the people you must have to pass this thing?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, Chip, that's why we rented a pretty large room here and had the usher find an extra number of chairs in order to accommodate many viewpoints.
Q    I mean, you had all those great meetings with the Republicans before the stimulus, too.
MR. GIBBS:  I understand.  You know, so that you guys will have something to cover in the intervening, say, nine months, let's not fast-forward through the entire legislative process over the course of a conference that hasn't even had its closing remarks by the President.  I think we might be getting, dare I say, a tad ahead of ourselves.
Q    But isn't there value in doing more than setting forth principles, really getting --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- look, I've said this many times; I'm happy to do it again:  This is obviously a complex issue.  It has bedeviled administrations before.  This is the opening -- I'll go back to my baseball analogies -- this is the opening pitch.  This may be even the ceremonial first pitch. 
But again, we've got a long way to go, but I think if you step back and look at the way the process is starting differently than it has started in the past, you'll see that people involved, for instance, in running commercials largely given credit for torpedoing health care reform 15 or 16 years ago occupy one of those chairs today.  We've brought doctors, nurses, insurance companies, business, labor, pharmaceuticals, Democrats and Republicans and the President of the United States into this discussion and into the beginning of this process.
The legislative road is going to be, as I'd said before, long and winding.  But I would not -- I'm not going to fast-forward through all the arguments and get to the end of this legislative process again before the first -- the first pitch reaches the plate, so to speak, in this argument.  But, you know, again -- I've emphasized this already today, but I'll say it again -- I think that -- I think that many of the lessons that are learned on how to do this in an open and transparent way, and how to bring important stakeholders involved together to begin the process is one that's of tremendous value and is tremendously important in order to find that consensus.
There's no doubt that in order for this to happen there is going to have to be a consensus.  I think that's what the President started.  The legislative leaders from the Republican Party were down here; they've sent letters commending the notion of doing this in a process that's open, and I think we're encouraged by the start.
Helen.  Yes, ma'am.
Q    In that respect, I want you to reconcile two things.
MR. GIBBS:  Okay.
Q    In prepared remarks the President said every voice must be heard.  He also said, "I want it to be clear at the outset, everyone has a right to take part in the sessions."  But you have barred two people who are strongly for single-payer.  And Conyers had to beg to come. 
MR. GIBBS:  Who was barred?
Q    You barred Dr. Angell -- Marcia Angell and Dr. Quentin Young, both staunch advocates of single-payer Medicare for all.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I am pretty sure that their -- those viewpoints are represented in that room.
Q    Why were they barred?
MR. GIBBS:  I will certainly check on -- I told Chip we rented a big room, but we didn't get the Nationals' baseball stadium.  There's a lot of people that are involved.  There were a limited number of seats, but a lot of different viewpoints.  We could have had 535 members of Congress, in addition to all these stakeholders, because I think everybody is going to be involved in this. 
I would also say I think this is the first of many discussions and many issues --
Q    I think it was quite an insult to Conyers.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- look, there were a lot of members of Congress that wanted to come and were added to the list.  Again, I think there's a lot of people that are involved in this process; the bill will go through many committees and I think -- I think a lot of different viewpoints will be expressed today.  And I think many of those viewpoints will have somebody to make them.
Q    Why is the President against single-payer?
MR. GIBBS:  The President doesn't believe that's the best way to achieve the goal of cutting costs and increasing access. 
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, is the -- one of the reasons for the deadline, this sort of this-year deadline -- Max Baucus has said it, Henry Waxman has said that the bill has got to happen this year -- how much does it affect that it's an odd-number year, and the minute -- the longer it takes the closer you get to next mid-term election makes this a harder political challenge?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, look -- obviously in even-numbered years there's a bit of a silly season here in terms of getting things done.  I think everyone would recognize that.  I also think that it is important that we simply not delay reform any longer.  The number of people that lack access increase every year.  Each year more and more businesses are forced to either lay off people or can't afford to offer health care to their employees, because of the sky rocketing inflation for medical costs.  That's why the President sought, and thought it was important to seek funding for medical technology and health IT that would begin the process of driving down costs by bringing our health care system into the electronic age.
The President believes, and it's been written that his plans are ambitious, and they are, because the President strongly believes that we can't -- we can no longer wait to get this done.  I'm sure that you could certainly rationalize virtually every priority waiting until a different time to do that.  I think the President believes that we should not miss the important opportunity to finally get something done for the American people.
Q    On that point, do you -- it seems like -- he talked about it today, he said that it's the very foundation of our economy, health care, and a lot of things have been wrapped into the economic crisis.  Are you worried about sort of wearing out the public -- giving the public crisis fatigue here by having the agenda -- you know, pushing another -- saying, if you don't do it now, you can't get it done.  I mean, is there a point where you overload the system and you overload the circuits?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think if you look at the news every day on the economy, I'm pretty sure the American people have -- they're well into crisis fatigue.  There are retirees for auto companies that are dependent upon health care that are in crisis.  There are families that are experiencing a loved one getting sick that are in crisis.  We are dealing with job loss -- we'll get statistics on that tomorrow -- retail sales figures, home sales figures. 
There's -- I do think the American people are going to have crisis fatigue.  They want somebody to begin to lessen those crises and start solving some of these problems for the American people.  And I think they have confidence that this President and this Congress will be able to work together to get something done and deal with many of those challenges that they face in their everyday lives.
Yes, sir.
Q    About the markets, have there been conversations within the White House about how best the White House can respond to or should respond to the ups and downs in the markets?  And are you at all concerned that people will be watching your policies through the lens of what's going on in the markets?
MR. GIBBS:  It is amusing I didn't get this question yesterday.  (Laughter.)
Q    You didn't call on me.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  You know, I -- well, if you're the designated guy, then just keep your hand up.  You know, for those at home that didn't understand my joke, the market went up yesterday, and despite the virtually sold-out audience here, I didn't get a question about how the market was doing.
Q    We don't focus on the day-to-day fluctuations.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  That is -- judging from when the market is up and the lack of questions, I think that's uniquely obvious.
Q    Do you want a question on the market today?
MR. GIBBS:  No, but I am -- I am enamored that different questions seem to come on different days. 
David, as I've said before and the President believes, that he's here to look at the long-term solutions and to get our country on a path to create jobs, stabilize our financial system, deal with our home foreclosure crisis, most importantly, as I said, get people back to work.  And I think the focus, as he said, on the sort of day-to-day gyrations of that, I think aren't necessarily focusing on those long-term solutions.
Again, and I've said this before, I think there's -- there are some on Wall Street -- well, there are some on Wall Street that would rather government do nothing, right?  We saw that rant.  There are some on Wall Street that would like, as I said yesterday, to come in, simply take all that happened that others on Wall Street caused, that are wrong, buy it at an exorbitant rate, take it off their books, and hit the reset button. 
The President is focused on a strategy that he believes will best get our economy moving again quickly but also get our economy in a position to grow continually for the long term.  That may or may not be what gyrates the stock market up or down on any given day.  The President is focused instead on that long-term strategy for the American people.
Q    But do you ever -- do you at least have concerns that others may see it differently you know --
MR. GIBBS:  Like you guys?
Q    Like maybe some in this room or some outside this room.
MR. GIBBS:  Is the President concerned about the economy?  Yes.  Do we have meetings and discussions on the economy?  Yes.  Are we focused on getting it turned around, putting people back to work?  Yes.
Q    On that point, do you expect any more bad numbers with the jobs report tomorrow?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't expect good news.  I assume that's part of what the market sees today.  But I think the American people understand, as I've said, the decisions that got us to the point -- got us to the point that we're in now didn't happen all at once, they didn't happen overnight, that it's going to take quite some time for us to move forward, and that the only way that we're going to do that is to create jobs and to invest in many of the things that have long been ignored.  That's what the President outlined in his speech to Congress -- not just a short-term plan to get the economy moving again that Congress passed, not just a foreclosure plan to stop the spread of home foreclosures, or a plan to stabilize our financial system -- but to invest in many of the long-term things that we need for sustained economic growth.
Yes, sir.
Q    The Commerce Secretary nominee Gary Locke has told senators and he's also said on camera that statistical sampling will not be used to conduct the census in 2010.  How comfortable with the White House with that approach to the census?
MR. GIBBS:  I'm -- the President has confidence in his -- in the Commerce Secretary nominee, who controls the -- who oversees the office of the census.  I don't have anything particular on that.
Q    Treasury Secretary Geithner is conducting a tremendous amount of very important business, as you remind us from this podium with some regularity.  He's up on Capitol Hill with some great frequency, and yet the top 17 positions beneath him have yet to be nominated or filled.  And I'm wondering if there is an explanation about that from the White House and what level of reassurance you can give the American public who might like to see, to use your baseball analogy, a fuller team behind the starting pitcher.
THE PRESS:  Whoa.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  I guess you got bonus points for that.
Q    I'm not sure a "whoa" is a bonus point, but I'll take what I can get.
MR. GIBBS:  I don't -- well, I was interpreting it for the positive for you.  Look, we have tremendous confidence in Secretary Geithner and we are working with the committees of jurisdiction in order to get nominees both up to Capitol Hill and through the process of getting them into government.  I think that if you look at what the Treasury Department has been able to do in a little over six weeks -- I think if you look at just what the Treasury Department and the rest of the economic team have done in the previous two days:  a business and lending initiative that when fully implemented will include more than a trillion dollars for lending for businesses, for families; and comprehensive data and details for a home foreclosure plan that I think received positive remarks yesterday and positive support from lenders, from consumers, and then will have an impact as the first comprehensive program to deal with home foreclosures. 
Q    What accounts for the delay?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, we are -- we are continually looking for good people; we're continuing to get them through a very rigorous process to serve --
Q    A more rigorous process?
MR. GIBBS:  A very rigorous process.  And we're doing it with all involved as quickly as we can.
Q    So no frustration on congressional pace on this?
MR. GIBBS:  We're working through a very rigorous process.
Yes.
Q    Sir, to bring it back to health care, what role does the administration -- would like to see primary care play?  And we hear so much about the overutilization of services and the great reliance on specialists.  What role will primary care play in health care reform efforts?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, I think that primary care will be represented, certainly is represented today, and is part of the discussion.  We -- there have been discussions and I'm sure it will be talked about today in terms of the over-reliance on specialists, the lack of preventive care, a host of things that go into the notion that we have a health care system that spends more than virtually every industrialized country, yet sees outcomes that lag behind those same countries.
The President wants to have a lengthy discussion on what any benefit would look like and how we can get a process moved forward that finally cuts the cost for health care for businesses and for families.  It's a -- but I think this is part of the long and ongoing process.
Q    Robert, can you tell us about the Columbus trip tomorrow, and is this just to talk about the job situation, or is there a larger -- larger point here?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that we'll have a little bit more information on it later on today.  Obviously Ohio has been hard hit by the economic crisis that we face.  They've seen a lot of job loss.  The President will certainly talk about the figures that will come out tomorrow, and also talk about how the Recovery and Reinvestment Plan is being implemented, and implemented in a way that will save and create jobs.
I read a story from this podium several weeks ago about a recruiting class for the Columbus Police Academy, that the day before they were to graduate they were laid off.  I think tomorrow's story, the city is understanding that the money that they'll see from legislation will allow them to save those jobs, put those cops back on the street.  And I think that's a good-news story in a day in which there will be some very tough economic figures.
Ann.
Q    Thank you, Robert.  Why is the President inviting Iran to an international conference?  What does he expect the Iranian representative to bring to the table?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the -- the Secretary proposed -- Secretary Clinton today proposed a regional conference on Afghanistan.  She was enunciating what the President has talked about many times in the notion that the problems and the challenges that we face in Afghanistan have to be dealt with not just as one country, but as a region.  The conference that was proposed, we would invite and include the neighbors of Afghanistan, which, as you know, geographically Iran is one of them. 
The President talked about using all elements of our national power to improve our foreign policy.  Obviously Afghanistan is something that presents a great challenge not just for our country but for the rest of the world.  I would expect that Iran would be invited, as a neighbor, and that we hope, if they decide to come, that they'll bring constructive solutions and ideas in working with the international community to address the challenges that are involved in Afghanistan.  I think what the Secretary enunciated was what the President has long talked about.
Q    Will the U.S. representative there -- would it be Secretary Clinton actually meet individually with the Iranians?
MR. GIBBS:  I think that might be a little bit far down -- I'm not sure what the exact agenda would be, but obviously we hope that all of Afghanistan's neighbors are available and that the dialogue is constructive and moves this forward.
Q    Robert, how high a priority is -- to the President -- is passing card check this year, and how far is he going to fight to get it passed through the Senate?  Because he did mention it to the AFL and again today the Vice President did.
MR. GIBBS:  And obviously this is a priority of the administration's, as we talked about in the campaign, and is one of the priorities that we've, as I said, talked about in the campaign, and something that the administration would like to see as part of many of the priorities that we're dealing with move forward at some point later on.
Thanks, guys.
Q    Robert, I have something you don't have, which is a radio.
MR. GIBBS:  Oh, yes.
Q    And I want you to enjoy the miracle of radio --
MR. GIBBS:  There we go.
Q    -- right here.  It's really kind of high-tech and I hope you'll enjoy it.
MR. GIBBS:  Oh.  Well, I would like --
Q    Does he get a question for that?  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  I mentioned yesterday I didn't have a radio, right? 
Q    There's your radio.
MR. GIBBS:  I would like to announce here that my son needs a college fund.  (Laughter.)  And my car is a little bit old.  (Laughter.)
Q    Robert, while I'm at it, where is -- where is our D.C. license plate?  Mr. Burton did not call me back yesterday, and --
THE PRESS:  Ohhhh!
MR. GIBBS:  Hey, need to get a radio.  (Laughter.)
Q    President Obama -- I don't think you need to be reminded of this -- carried every precinct in the District of Columbia in the primary and the general, and he got 93 percent of the vote.  Isn't he being somewhat of an ingrate?  He voted for the bill -- he voted for the bill.  Why won't he put it --
MR. GIBBS:  -- radio back in here.
Q    Why won't he put it on the limousine?  President Clinton put it on.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, President Clinton put it on for the end of his term.  I will --
Q    It's going to be the end of the term?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, maybe if we're ingrateful they'll shoo us out of here before the end of our term.  Let me check --
Q    Wouldn't it show solidarity -- supposedly you were going to check on it a few weeks ago.
MR. GIBBS:  I entrusted it with Bill Burton and -- (laughter) -- the fact that if this -- the radio most assuredly violates the gift rules and ingratefully I'm probably going to have to give this back.
Q    Why won't the President -- really, why --
MR. GIBBS:  Mark, I will, as I said, I'll certainly check on this.  And no longer am I going to trust Bill with the important questions.  (Laughter.)


END
3:30 P.M. EST
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/9/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                        March 9, 2009
PRESS BRIEFING BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:40 P.M. EDT
MR. GIBBS: Good afternoon. How is everyone today?
Q Good.
MR. GIBBS: Excellent. I have no prerecorded announcements, so we're off.
Q Robert, the President's focus in his remarks about the manipulation and coercion of scientific research and community, I was wondering if you could elaborate a bit on what he was referring to specifically.
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think obviously we've all seen stories in the past few years where the political process overrode the scientific process on any number of issues. And I think the President was quite clear today in saying that politics should not drive science, that science and our values can exist hand in hand and not compete with each other, as has been posited in the past; that today marks a step forward in what could be promising research to find cures to some of our -- to many tragic diseases.
And the President not only is pleased to take that step forward, but to ensure that the decisions that are made surrounding this are based not on ideology and politics, but instead on science.
Q But beyond issues like climate change and this one about stem cell research, are there any other --
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think those are the primary ones that have been the focus over the past number of years. But, again, we've all seen where a decision comes up through a governmental agency to do one thing and when it surfaces toward the top, politics takes hold.
The President believes that on matters that are as important as the issues that you just outlined, that science be the determining factor, not politics or ideology.
Yes, ma'am.
Q I have two questions on the economy. Can you talk about the meeting that the President had this morning with Chairman Bernanke? And then, separately, there were two stories -- one in The Financial Times and one in The Wall Street Journal -- saying that U.S. emphasis at the G20 will be on economic stimulus. Is that going to be your message at that meeting? And is there a rift with the Europeans who want to emphasize regulatory reform?
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me start with Chairman Bernanke. He was in the President's economic daily briefing. This was about -- let's see, I was in there -- it started at about 10:00 a.m., lasted for about 45 minutes, with -- also in there were Secretary Geithner, NEC Director Summers, and CEA Director Romer, in order to get an update on the economic situation and ideas for -- I'm sorry, an idea about where the Fed Chair sees the economy going over the next several years, and steps that can be taken to change the course that we're currently on. Again, the conversation lasted about 45 minutes with the President.
In terms of the G20, I've seen some of these stories. I think -- and I think this goes much to what I talked about, or have talked about up here, which is there is not one single solution to the global economic challenges that we all face. And I think that's -- when you pick up the newspaper, that becomes even more readily apparent, reading about the global downturn.
And the efforts -- our efforts at the G20 in London will focus on a number of subjects, both financial regulation and economic stimulus, largely because there isn't one single solution to those problems; that quite frankly unless we do both, as the President has started to do here, in addition to dealing in this country with home foreclosures and with financial stability, that only by addressing all of these different avenues are we going to be able to correct the economic downturn and get the economy moving again. So I think --
Q Is there a rift with the Europeans, though?
MR. GIBBS: I don't think so. I think -- I think the President would say this is -- inside -- this is a sort of classic -- not an either/or but a both/and moment; that I think many things will be on the table to discuss and I think both regulation of the financial -- of our financial system to ensure that what didn't prevent this current crisis from happening, that we have regulations in place to ensure that that -- there are steps in there to ensure that it doesn't, as well as how we all work together to ensure a stimulus and a recovery plan that will get the economy moving again. So I don't think there's any rift at all.
Q Mr. Gibbs, two questions. First, Chinese vessels have been harassing U.S. ships with increasing aggressiveness. I know that the Chinese defense attaché went to the Pentagon, or is at the Pentagon right now, to review a complaint, but is the President taking any other action regarding the Chinese government, to tell them to stop doing this?
MR. GIBBS: I know that our embassy in both Beijing and here protested the actions of the Chinese ships that have been reported. Our ships obviously operate fairly regularly in international waters where these incidents took place. We're going to continue to operate in those international waters, and we expect the Chinese to observe international law around them.
Q And the second question, Mr. Warren Buffett, who I guess you could say is an informal advisor to the President, did an interview this morning and he had obviously many fine things to say about the President, but he did say two things and I was wondering about your reaction. One, he referred to the cap and trade as a regressive tax that consumers would ultimately pay for; and then two, he said that the message, the economic message that the world was getting from this administration was "muddled." I was just wondering if you had a reaction to either of those.
MR. GIBBS: Well, I would -- I think I would point you back to the transcript of Mr. Buffett in terms of your second question. I'm not entirely sure that the message wasn't directed at Washington writ large. And I think --
Q Aren't you "Washington writ large"?
MR. GIBBS: I think we dispensed with that several hundred years ago in a revolution. (Laughter.)
No, obviously there's 535, plus the administration, that regularly are asked and share their opinions related to the economy. You know, I think that many of the things that Mr. Buffett said, the administration would understand and agree with -- particularly I think the stories that I read this morning talked about the notion that Mr. Buffett said Democrats and Republicans are going to have to get along and work together in order to get the country out of this economic mess. And I don't -- this is me saying this, not him; I don't want to paraphrase what he said -- but I think the administration believes that saying "no" isn't an economic policy.
Q What about the cap and trade being --
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me finish this one first. I think Mr. Buffett also said that we're not likely to fix this in five minutes. I don't think we're likely to fix this in six weeks and six days; that the depth of the challenges we face -- as made even more apparent on Friday with rising unemployment figures -- denote the urgency of this problem, and the urgency with which the President pursued a recovery plan.
In terms of cap and trade, the President and the administration look forward to working with Congress to put a solution together -- a market-based solution that will drive us to energy independence and create a market for -- an even more robust market for alternative fuels and, as I said, the steps that we need to become energy independent.
This is a process that rewards the innovation of the market, a principle that many previously have espoused.
Yes, sir.
Q In terms of the timing of the President's executive order today, why did the President believe that it was so important to do that now, when there's so much pressing going on with unemployment -- you talked about the unemployment numbers, the stock market, the economy in disarray. Why did he feel it was so important to do that today?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think -- again, I don't want to get ahead of where the science is on this. But, obviously, stem cell research has shown great promise in the capability of potentially solving many life-saving -- in dealing with life-saving cures for deadly and tragic diseases. I don't think that -- I don't think people that suffer from these diseases or have watched loved ones suffer from these diseases would believe that we should delay what the President did today. I'm not sure what kind of message that would send. But, you know --
Q I'm not saying delay it, though -- but this particular climate, you know, these last few weeks where the economy --
MR. GIBBS: Well, if we didn't do it now, and you -- and you're talking about this particular climate, but you're not talking about delay. What -- I mean, maybe I'm confused. I mean, I -- you know, I think the President believes that it's tremendously important to take this step to open up the notion of funding potentially promising scientific research, and more importantly to put science back in charge of the scientific process, and take politics out of it.
I think that obviously -- I'm not sure that -- I'm not sure there's ever a bad time to do that. But let's take this larger argument about -- and this builds a little bit off of Caren's question -- there are many challenges that this administration -- this administration is dealing with, and many challenges that this country faces.
As the President said on Friday in an interview, he would love the opportunity to only have to focus on one of those challenges at a time. I think given the many challenges that we face, that's a little bit of a flight of fancy. We have many things to deal with; certainly, many things on our plate. But Washington has for many, many years, postponed or put off dealing with the problems that we're now facing.
You know, let's step back for a second and understand, you know -- health care. You've seen members of Congress talk about the fact that given what we're dealing with, why can this administration -- why is this administration contemplating dealing with things like Medicare and Medicaid and the rising cost of health care? The rising cost of health care is one of the principle drivers of our deficit and our debt. You can't stand up and say, I'm horribly concerned that Washington is taking -- is spending money and handing the bill to our children and our grandchildren, on one hand, and then talk about the fact that dealing with something like health care isn't a priority.
Because if we do nothing with Medicare and Medicaid, by 2050 spending on Medicare and Medicaid alone will account for 20 percent not of our budget -- 20 percent of our gross domestic product.
These are problems that are going to have to be dealt with. We can either decide, as Washington typically has, to kick the can down the road and hope that either the problem goes away or that somebody else will come and solve it, or we can address the challenges that face and -- that face our country and undermine our long-term economic growth -- energy independence; you'll see the President talk about education tomorrow and he'll certainly do it within this frame.
Obviously health care, given the amount of spending that goes into our budget each year for Medicare and Medicaid, and what we've watched families and businesses struggle with the skyrocketing costs over the past few years, means we can't walk away from these -- from addressing these problems right now.
Q Back to Warren Buffett for a second. Understanding what you said and what he said about part of the confusion that people feel is the function of 535 members in Congress, and so on. He did say the President has the most authoritative voice. Does the President bear any responsibility for what Warren Buffett described as confusion and fear --
MR. GIBBS: Well, look, I think that Mr. Buffett, and again I -- I think Mr. Buffett is talking about a period of time that has spanned now two administrations, that has watched different policy proposals to deal with different things. But I think Mr. Buffett would agree that -- and in fact, said in not so many words -- but that this problem isn't going to be fixed overnight. We didn't get here -- we didn't get here overnight; the problems that we dealt with starting in sort of early to mid-September of last year didn't start last summer. Many of those problems started years ago. Many of the systemic problems that were rooted in what ultimately failed took place a while ago.
Q In terms of communicating a solution or even a sense that we have it well in hand, can you -- any room for improvement there?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think obviously the President would always say there's room for improvement; that the President believes that we have to continue to give people a realistic sense of where this economy is, but also talk about, as he did at the speech to Congress, that we've got to make sure people understand that brighter days are ahead. But I think there's a sense from certain people that -- of either chagrin or surprise -- that in one day less than seven weeks all of the problems that took many years to take hold haven't necessarily been solved.
I think if you look -- if you realistically look at what this administration has done in that six weeks and six days, you'll see putting in place a recovery and reinvestment plan that we think will create jobs, put money in taxpayers' pockets, and get money directly out to the states to deal with crushing budget cuts that will impact those that can least afford it; a home foreclosure plan that will begin to address millions of people that have played by the rules, but should they get into further economic trouble, might have problems making their mortgage payment and watch a home foreclosure crisis spread; put in place the building blocks of a financial stability plan through a capital investment program, business and lending initiative that the Secretary announced just last week. And obviously we've started and will continue in Congress and through the G20 to ensure that a regulatory structure is in place to ensure these types of problems never happen again.
We've made tremendous progress in getting the pillars, as the President said last week, in place to deal with our economic problems. The recovery will take quite some time, as it's taken quite some time to get into these problems. But the President remains focused each and every day in ensuring that we take the steps to make those decisions and get the economy moving again.
Chip.
Q In his statement today he said, "We will ensure that our government never opens the door to the use of human cloning for human reproduction." How will he ensure that?
MR. GIBBS: I think the executive order -- I don't have it in front of me -- simply bans human cloning, I think as many people have suggested should be done.
Q Can I ask you, how aggressively is he going to move in Congress on stem cells, or is it now time to get back to the economy and set this aside? I mean, number one, they need to put this in legislative language, according to Democrats on the Hill. And number two, there are legal barriers to stem cell research --
MR. GIBBS: Well, there's legal barriers through an amendment that prevents using federal funding to create additional stem cell lines from embryos. That ban -- obviously the President -- this executive order doesn't deal with it. That's a legislative issue, and obviously a legislative issue for Congress.
Q Will he push harder on --
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the -- most of you talked to folks in our administration yesterday -- the President obviously is going to let Congress do Congress's work on this. But I think what the President has done is allow federal funding for lines that have been created in the interim in order to, hopefully, take advantage of potentially lifesaving cures. And I think that's -- the President believes that that was an appropriate step and one that he hopes will have a lasting impact on our society.
Yes, ma'am.
Q Why is the President continuing the Bush inhumane policy of rendition?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that -- let's not confuse rendering somebody that's picked up and delivered to the country that they're wanted in with something like extraordinary rendition that moves -- that could potentially move somebody not necessarily wanted in another country, but is dealt with in a way that's inconsistent with our laws and our values.
Q How do you know that? And also --
MR. GIBBS: Based on what the President has signed in terms of executive orders.
Q -- they aren't being sent to the country that wants them, they've been sent anywhere --
MR. GIBBS: I'm sorry --
Q -- where they're known for torture.
MR. GIBBS: Well, again, those are -- I think the President has made clear America's policy on that through the executive order; the process that goes forward in dealing with the detainees that are currently -- and with the detainees that are currently at Guantanamo Bay.
Jonathan.
Q The President apparently sent a memorandum to agencies and departments today on signing statements, and I hope you could elaborate a little bit about what he's instructing them to do. And which signing statements of President Bush is he -- does he have in mind when he says, do not necessarily take these operationally?
MR. GIBBS: Well, we will release the memorandum that the President has sent to agencies. Obviously signing statements have been in existence for two centuries in order for Presidents to make known constitutional problems with ideas that are in legislation without necessarily dealing a veto to the entire piece of legislation. Obviously the proliferation of omnibus legislation has made that even more prevalent.
I think the previous administration issued hundreds and hundreds of signing statements that specifically entailed -- and I can -- we'll certainly get you some examples -- but specifically entailed, through those signing statements, that people disregard portions of legislation or the intent of Congress.
This President will use signing statements in order to go back to what has previously been done, and that is to enumerate constitutional problems that either the Justice Department or the -- or legislative council here see as a potential problem through their reading, but not ask that laws be disallowed simply by executive fiat. I will get that --
Q So he feels that he's going back to the original intent of --
MR. GIBBS: Back to the original intent of a signing -- of signing statements to simply enumerate for those -- like I said, what problems might be inherent in a piece of legislation, without asking that the federal government disallow or ignore congressional intent.
Mark.
Q Robert, was Bernanke here today because the administration is looking for more coordinated action between the administration and the Fed?
MR. GIBBS: We're always looking for coordinated action, and I think that's exactly what's happened over the previous almost seven weeks. I think if you look at -- I mentioned this earlier, the business and lending initiative last week was done in coordination with Treasury and the Fed. I think having been in that meeting, there was a lot of agreement about where we've been and where we're going, between those two entities. This was an opportunity for the President to speak with the chair and get his thoughts and updates on where we are and where the economy is headed.
But I think the President is quite pleased at the steps and the coordination that have been taken together not just with the Fed and Treasury, but the Fed, Treasury, FDIC, and other regulatory institutions in order to ensure that the actions that our government takes are done together in order to see the best outcome available.
Q Any discussion today of the omnibus bill?
MR. GIBBS: In that meeting or in --
Q In that meeting.
MR. GIBBS: That was not discussed in this meeting.
Q In other meetings?
MR. GIBBS: None that I've been in today.
Q On tomorrow's speech to the Hispanics on education, could you give us a little more?
MR. GIBBS: We'll have a little bit more for you later today. But, I mean, I think what the President will outline -- the beginnings of a reform agenda on education; obviously talk about the nature of what has been -- what's already gone through and the potential of what's gone through Congress through the Recovery and Reinvestment Plan; and also steps that he thinks that the administration and Congress can take together to improve our educational system for the 21st century in order to ensure the long-term growth that people in Washington and throughout this country know we have to have.
Q And on the Buffett line, is -- does the White House agree with his basic intention, that Washington is this cosmic force, speaks in a muddled voice sometimes?
MR. GIBBS: I don't -- look, obviously, Washington has -- Washington is always full of varying opinions, but I think that the President and his economic team have taken strong and decisive action in a little less than seven weeks in order to face the many challenges that we have, in order to take steps to address both our short-term economic needs through recovery and reinvestment, as well as the underpinnings for our long-term growth that are contained in this budget.
Q So message-wise, you think you're cutting through the clutter?
MR. GIBBS: Despite some occasional bumps in this room, most of the time, yes.
Major.
Q Robert, to follow up on Chip's question, when the President says he wants to ban cloning, what precisely does he mean, because there is a --
MR. GIBBS: I could get you some -- I don't have the executive order or the specific language in front of me, but I could certainly get you some more on that.
Q Okay. On the question of embryonic versus adult stem cells, does the President or do you, representing him, have an opinion as to which has so far showed more scientific progress? And which would be more likely to receive federal budgeting with this executive order?
MR. GIBBS: I think the second executive order puts science in charge of those decisions. I think the President, being a public official rather than a scientist, would leave many of those important decisions to those in a lab coat with their sleeves rolled up doing that research.
Q And during the transition, the Chief of Staff said he'd never want to let a crisis go to waste. The Secretary of State said that on the road last week. As a governing philosophy, what does that mean? What is the rationale behind the idea that you don't want to let a crisis go to waste, as you prepare public policy to the American public?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I did not see Secretary Clinton's comments, and I've not spoken specifically to the Chief of Staff about this. But what I think what -- the mind-set that the administration has brought to our governing choices is what I enumerated earlier, and that is that for far too long many of the problems that we understand undermine our potential long-term economic growth -- whether it's dealing with our health care crisis, whether it's our increasing dependence on foreign oil, despite President after President after President discussing the dangers -- and as I said, he'll outline tomorrow some ideas for reform on education, because unless or until we meet those challenges and take those steps, we're sort of muddling around the edges; that we have to take some concrete, bold action to deal with the many challenges that we face; that our economy is not likely to grow in the long term unless or until we deal with them.
Jeff.
Q Robert, as tomorrow marks the seventh week, I think, of the administration, what is your assessment of the process and speed of the nominations to the various agencies and departments in terms of deputies and things? And what does the President think of the progress, and is there any -- any examples, do you think, that he is more troubled by than others in terms of agencies?
MR. GIBBS: Well -- and I read out some statistics of a week or so ago and I'll certainly -- will get updated statistics and give them out to you all. I think if you look at the number of positions that you discussed that have been both nominated and approved, you'd find that this White House is ahead of the pack of many previous White House administrations in putting together a team throughout the Cabinet and the agencies involved in order to further the President and America's agenda.
Look, obviously there's always a push and pull to this. And there's no doubt that you would love to walk in on the first day with the lights on and everybody at their desk, but I think the statistics denote quite clearly the progress that's been made and the fact that we're ahead of the curve in ensuring that people are at their jobs and working.
Obviously there's always room for improvement and we're working diligently each day to ensure that more nominees are sent and that we have cooperation with -- on our side, with Capitol Hill, in getting hearings and people in those jobs.
Q Does he have a concern at all that that the process has been so rigorous in some respects, that good people are being either left behind of the time frame --
MR. GIBBS: I haven't talked to him specifically about that. I think that there -- undoubtedly, there's a rigorous process involved. We hope that we're working with Capitol Hill to ensure that at the same time there's appropriate rigor and vetting; that there's not in any way any undue delay in ensuring that good people who want to serve their country can get into the jobs that they've been nominated for, in order to, like I said, further America's agenda.
Q Do you think there has been any?
MR. GIBBS: No, I -- again, I haven't talked to him specifically about it, but obviously there's a balance and we hope that -- that those two things will be balanced so that we can expeditiously get in place a government that America can be proud of.
Q Let me take one more crack at what Dan was getting at before. Talking about tomorrow on education, the administration's critics say that, you know, there's a house on fire; that the economy, you know, needs, for example, a functioning credit market and there's still not a fully functioning plan for getting toxic assets off the books. Why should the President be talking something -- about something that admittedly would be, you know, important for future generations to improve education in America, when there's a house on fire right now?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think part of the house that's on fire is dealing with the education problem. That's why that there was --
Q It's that broken?
MR. GIBBS: I don't think there's any doubt. I mean, look, we're not here -- we're not facing these economic challenges because of one thing; we're not going to get out of these by solving one thing. If I would have asked you six months ago, how did we get into this mess, you probably would have told me homes, right? You might have. But now maybe it's banks. Or maybe it's not enough spending in order to create stimulus to get people moving again. Maybe it's, you may have said, like the President did in September of 2007, that he was concerned that we didn't have a regulatory structure that was updated to meet our financial system.
Q Is it reading scores? Is it math scores?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that -- are there people in high school today that are going to have to take jobs in the next either few weeks, few months or few years that we better have a trained work force in order to meet the jobs of the future? I hope so. I think -- let's posit this: Let's get our banking system fixed. Let's get credit flowing again. But tell me which business is going to borrow money to expand, to add jobs, to do stem cell research, that can't find the people either coming out of college today or graduate school to do those jobs. Where are we going to go? Where do those jobs usually go? Somewhere overseas, right? Does that make sense for our long-term economic growth?
Q I guess I'm asking in the context of the muddled message that you talked about. Does it muddle the message?
MR. GIBBS: But I -- I thought I was less muddled and maybe more clear. I think that unless we take all of these steps -- your analogy about the house is on fire. Which room are you going to put out first? Or are you going to call the fire department and ask them to put all of it out? Or are you going to say, you know what, we love the living room; start over there. (Laughter.) And if you can, get quickly to the kitchen, and next to the den.
We could do that. And maybe by the time they get to the kitchen or the den the whole house is in ashes. Instead of asking the fire department to pick different rooms in which to extinguish, the President has decided to alert the fire department and everyone involved; that we have a responsibility to move this country forward, address the long-term problems and the short-term problems in order to create jobs for the future.
Ann.
Q When you say that the President asked Chairman Bernanke for some of his view of where the economy is going over the next few years, is that a reflection that maybe now the President thinks it is to be a matter of many years before there is real sign of improvement? And does he agree with Warren Buffett, who says that the economy has dropped off a cliff?
MR. GIBBS: I haven't asked him specifically about what -- Mr. Buffett's analogy. I think the President would and has for quite some time, dating back to the transition, spoken with clarity about the economic situation that we're in. In many cases, some of -- some people criticized him for being too realistic, though I think Mr. Buffett might have been quite crystal clear about the challenges that we face.
In terms of what he spoke to the Fed chair about, I don't mean to presume that what they discussed was the fact that this was going to take many, many years. I think that, you know, there's a reason why the Recovery and Reinvestment Plan doesn't just take into account the remaining parts of this fiscal year, but also goes into 2010 and even parts of 2011, because many of the deficiencies that we face and the challenges that we have require us to address many years' worth of problems. But I don't think it denotes in any way one set of options or another; just that they're important.
Yes.
Q Planning a second stimulus?
MR. GIBBS: The focus right now in this White House is to ensure that the money that taxpayers -- that taxpayer money is -- has gotten out quickly, that jobs are created. You've seen the President make many announcements, and you'll see more, in order to ensure that money is spent wisely and quickly to get the economy moving again.
Yes.
Q Robert, are there some challenges that the administration has decided to postpone action on while it concentrates on education, health care, energy and the economic --
MR. GIBBS: No, I think the -- I'm sure if I had a little bit more time, I could probably think of some. I think the President would instead describe a scenario to you much like I did that denotes --
Q Is there a backyard shed, perhaps, that could allow -- (laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: Ask Mark if -- ask Mark if there's -- if the smoke coming from that is the shed or that we're just barbecuing something for lunch later.
Thanks, guys.
Q You are willing to debate Limbaugh now, aren't you?
MR. GIBBS: I'm busy this afternoon. (Laughter.)
END 
2:20 P.M. EDT
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/10/09
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
__________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                              March 10, 2009
PRESS BRIEFING
BY
PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
3:01 P.M. EDT
MR. GIBBS:  All right, I think I'm organized here.  Welcome back.
Q    Thank you.
MR. GIBBS:  Fire away.

Q    There's been a couple of -- there's been a little increase in bombings and attacks in Iraq since the President's announcement.  What is the concern here about any connection between the two, or what kind of information are you all getting about why this might be happening?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, obviously there are -- there continue to be, throughout Iraq, security challenges.  I think as the President enumerated in the speech that he gave at Camp Lejeune that our government and certainly our military remain strongly committed to ensuring peace and security in Iraq; continued training to give the Iraqis the opportunity and the responsibility for their own security; and that the President will continue to evaluate our policy in Iraq.

I don't know of any specific intelligence that has been gathered based on it, but I know that the President and the team remain committed to ensuring that Iraq is a stable and secure country going forward and that we'll continue to continually evaluate that.

Q    Was there any concern, though, that -- either here or from Iraqi officials -- that announcing a withdrawal and a schedule for withdrawal encourages or emboldens these kinds of attacks?

MR. GIBBS:  No.  I think, you know, in the conversation that the President had with the Iraqis that there was nothing about that.  Obviously, I mean, the previous administration negotiated and signed an agreement that ends not just our combat commitment but our entire military commitment, and I don't think that that would be done if it presented a scenario in which the country would fall into further danger.

Yes, sir.

Q    Robert, OPEC is meeting on March 15th to discuss potential future -- or additional cut in production.  Does the White House support or oppose a cut like that?  And are you concerned that if they did do that, that it would hurt the economy because oil prices may rise?

MR. GIBBS:  Let me ask folks around here whether there's -- what they've seen or said about this.  I mean, obviously the price of oil has come down greatly from the heights that we'd seen it in the middle of last year, the fall of last year, when folks were paying $4 for a gallon of gas.  And I do think that this administration, regardless of where the price is, is dedicated to ensuring that we take the steps necessary to reduce our dependence on foreign oil.

I think there are those that have said that with the price coming down, that there's a desire to step away from the reforms necessary to deal with the flow of oil and what our normal policy reaction is when gas does get much more expensive, that the President understands that we have to take those steps regardless of what the price is.

I'll certainly look into any specific things relating to it.

Q    The crux of the question is, are you telling OPEC your position?  Are you -- do you have a position?

MR. GIBBS:  Yes, let me see if anybody has communicated something specific to -- I don't have anything that -- at least off the top of mind -- to know whether anything specifically has been communicated.

Jake.

Q    There was a provision in the omnibus spending bill that helped -- that's tied up the bill from passing or from reaching 60 votes, having to do with Cuba and restrictions on Cuba, dealing with the financing of food and medicine shipments and travel.

Secretary Geithner wrote a letter to some of these senators who were concerned about it -- (door creaking) -- needs some oil.  (Laughter.)  Secretary Geithner --

MR. GIBBS:  That's in the stimulus -- we're going to get that.  (Laughter.)  An earmark.  (Laughter.

Q    -- wrote a letter to some of these senators, basically seeming -- the way it's being described by one of the Democrats' offices is that Secretary Geithner is basically reassuring him that some of these provisions are not going to be enacted as the people who drafted the legislation intended.  Could you clear this up a little?

MR. GIBBS:  Yes, and I think that somebody here has letters that we can share.  I think that what -- and I would also point you to Treasury, that obviously -- as you said, the author of the letters could -- some concern about the interpretation of what provisions met in terms of the ability to travel to Cuba for the purposes primarily of selling and for business that the Treasury Department deemed didn't -- in the bill, didn't fully equate to what some of the sponsors said or thought it might do in terms of legislative intent.

What the President talked about, obviously, throughout the campaign is a little different than this.  The President talked about increasing travel to visit family.  Right now, you know, there's a restriction relating to being able to go only a certain amount, usually surrounding a loved one becoming sick or ill or dying, and also provisions relating to sending money back.

But I would point to Treasury to get the exact language in some of those letters that are involved.

Q    The reason I ask is because it seems to -- and maybe I'm misunderstanding -- but it seems like the law as it's written would lift restrictions on financing that previously required cash-in-advance payment.  But Geithner is saying basically that cash-in-advance will remain the law, which seems to be kind of a like a signing statement, except it's not being done by the President at a podium, it's being done by the Secretary of the Treasury.

Q    Well, I mean, Jake, there's obviously, as you know, there's interpretations -- interpretations of what different provisions in each bill mean and those interpretations obviously are active -- it's like a presidential signing statement, except it's not the President and it's not a signing statement.

But I would go back to Treasury in terms of that letter and ask intent there.

Yes, sir.

Q    Robert, there are some reports that House Democrats got a briefing with some economists and a couple of them were predicting now that the stimulus will not save or create 3.5 million jobs, it will be more like 2.5 million jobs.  What's your sense about whether or not you may have to pull back from some of the predictions?  And also, is the door open to a second stimulus?  There's a lot of chatter about that right now, is there a possibility of that this year?

MR. GIBBS:  I don't know what specific predictions members of the House may have gotten that you referred to.  I think the President obviously, and the economic team, believe that the steps that we took in the Recovery and Reinvestment Plan will have a concrete impact on getting our economy moving again and putting people back to work.

In terms of a -- and I was asked this yesterday about a second stimulus -- obviously, our focus, the focus throughout this administration -- and you've seen the President talk about this on a number of occasions -- is doing all that we can to move the spending that's been authorized by Congress and signed into law by the President, to move that spending out to the states as quickly as possible or move those out to localities or construction projects -- what he did at the Department of Transportation -- in order to do so not just quickly, but to do so in a way that's transparent and the taxpayers are confident and assured that their money is being spent wisely.  I think our focus is ensuring that that money gets out there as quickly as possible so that we can get our economy turned around again.

Obviously the statistics in the last few days, the unemployment numbers late last week were yet another sobering reminder of the many economic challenges that we face.  The President understood that throughout the transition and the reason why he pushed aggressively for a stimulus plan that he thinks will get this economy moving again.

Q    The VA Secretary was on the Hill today and he confirmed -- Secretary Shinseki -- that the administration is considering a plan to have veterans have the treatment for their service-related injuries paid for with private insurance, rather than the government.  And there are a lot of veterans groups who have written to the President saying they believe this is outrageous and the government should be picking up the tab for those who served.  What can you say about why the President is considering this --

MR. GIBBS:  I've not seen what the VA Secretary had to say on this today, so let me go back and get a chance to read up on it.

Chip.

Q    A small flurry of reports on push-back from Democrats on the Hill, especially on the budget.  What's your take on those reports?  And are people here at the White House surprised by the push-back, or is it what you expected?

MR. GIBBS:  No, I think most people that have seen budgets go from here to there are not surprised that different individuals with competing interests look at and see different parts of a budget -- some things they like and some things they don't like -- whether it's Democrats or Republicans.  I think that's all part of the budgetary process in order to get something moved forward.

I think that the President is confident that this process will work its way through and that we'll get and make progress on putting ourselves both back on a path toward fiscal responsibility and fiscal sustainability, as well as making the necessary and needed investments that we talked about yesterday in order to get our economy growing for the long term.  I don't think ultimately the criticism is surprising -- that certainly happens and is all part of the process.

I would say this.  I think -- you know, the President talked about this in his speech to the Congress, and that is, there are obviously competing agendas here.  The President believes, and I think many -- I've certainly -- certainly many in Congress have discussed the notion of putting us on that path to fiscal responsibility, of making sure we're not wasting the taxpayers' money.  And the President assembled a budget that makes a lot of tough choices that affect different parts of and different regions of the country, and understands that not everybody will agree with the individual tough choices.  But I think the American people can be assured that the President has put forward a plan that will cut in half the budget deficit in four years and, as I said, make those necessary and needed investments.

Chuck.

Q    A couple things.  One, the President today in the beginning of his education speech took time out to address some of the chatter about the economy and about whether there was a focus on -- he's focused on too many things or whatever.  Is that an acknowledgment --

MR. GIBBS:  I would -- I would say in the beginning that that strategy seems vindicated yesterday with the market up 200-some-odd points off of the education speech.

Q    The administration is -- (laughter.)

MR. GIBBS:  I noticed.  I didn't know if anybody here did.

Q    Does this mean -- is it a (inaudible) acknowledgment that the President needs to be talking every day about the economy -- yesterday, by not talking to the economy, he's gotten people a little nervous, or is there a sense that the President needs to be more public about the economy, even more often than he is?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- I think the country can be reasonably assured that the President spends the vast amount of his waking time -- I can't speak to what he might think about when he's not awake -- but the vast amount of his time certainly working in this building in order to get the economy moving again and understanding the challenges that we face, but also understanding -- for instance, today -- I mean, let's be honest, there was a lot of criticism yesterday about this notion of tackling education as being part of the economy.

I think most people in America understand that unless we educate our children and create the workforce that's necessary and needed to support some of the industries that we hope will flourish in an economic recovery -- it's going to take a highly skilled, highly educated workforce -- that those things -- many of those things are connected.  Again, I think the American people can be assured that the President spends the vast majority of his time thinking and working on the economy.

Q    Citigroup apparently is profitable, or so we're hearing -- or at least this quarter.  The government has now got a huge ownership stake.  Did you guys get an -- did the President get an explanation today why Citi is showing a profit -- is it TARP, is it because of something else?  Have you guys been --

MR. GIBBS:  It wasn't the education speech.  (Laughter.)

Q    It wasn't the education speech.  (Laughter.)  But have you guys been given an explanation?  Do you feel --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, I obviously -- I don't know whether the President got an independent briefing on Citi, and I sort of hesitate to get into talking about the ups and downs of individual companies or banks.  Obviously --

Q    This is one that the government owns --

MR. GIBBS:  Sure.

Q    -- a lot of.

MR. GIBBS:  A decent chunk of.  I mean, obviously -- I mean, I think the -- you know, the President and his team have been focused on a strategy that will begin to make progress and help stabilize our banking system and our financial system, and that -- you know, again, I'm trying to divorce these a little bit, only in the sense that, as I have counseled many of you, that this is going to go up and it's going to go down, and that's the nature and the volatility of what we're involved in.

Q    So you're a little cautious on -- you're not sure what to -- I mean --

MR. GIBBS:  No, no, no, I just -- you know, I was very much joking when I mentioned what the market was doing today, and I'm sure tomorrow I'll get questions if it's headed in a different direction about the -- about that.  I just -- in terms of scorekeeping each day, I think, again, I think the -- again, not -- I want this comment not simply to be reflective of one company's progress in one day in the market; but that the President and his team are focused on a strategy that will stabilize the system and help us make progress in getting capital and loans out to small businesses and families that need it.

That's obviously what he spends a lot of time on, and I think, slowly but surely, we're going to make progress on this, understanding, as I've said, that it's going to take quite some time to get out of here.

Jonathan.

Q    Mark Malloch-Brown, the U.K.'s representative for the G20, said -- told reporters that the United States and the British want to make a significant gesture against protectionism at the ministers meeting next week, and may have some kind of aid package or finance package for the poorest of the poor countries that are just being hammered by the fall in imports from the richer countries.  Can you elaborate on what he's talking about, what the administration has planned?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me leave big economic pronouncements up to the Treasury Department and the larger economic team.  I think it is safe to, in a larger sense -- I mean, obviously what we've seen with a -- not surprisingly with a global economic slowdown, as you mentioned, is imports -- the American people obviously look at it as exporting, that there's been sort of a collective pulling back or shrinking of global trade because of both demand and capital and credit that are flowing.  I think this, along with financial regulation and stimulus, will be on the docket and will be prevalent in the agenda at the G20 in April, because -- and I think, you know, continued economic growth through trade is important, again, not as a -- not simply as one individual item, but as we look towards sustained long-term and continued economic growth.

Mark.

Q    Robert, is it still the President's intention to sign the omnibus bill when it reaches his desk?
MR. GIBBS:  It is.

Q    He has no second thoughts about it?

MR. GIBBS:  No.

Q    Does he believe that everything in that bill is essential spending, considering the over $1.5 trillion deficit he's projecting for this year?

MR. GIBBS:  Mark, I dare say that -- I bet many Presidents have signed bills that may not meet a hundred percent of their desires.  As I've said before, this is -- we're finishing the appropriations process that is generally concluded before the fiscal year starts on October -- this would be October 1, 2008.  This stuff should have been done before Senator Barack Obama became President-elect Barack Obama, and certainly before he became President Obama.

That having been said -- and I've said this from up here and I think it is safe to assume that tomorrow we'll have more on our concern for the appropriations and the spending process moving forward -- because though this represents one bill and several different appropriations bills, over the course of the President's tenure in Washington, dozens of those bills will come to his desk and that there will be some new rules of the road.

Q    Are you saying the bill contains more spending than he thinks is necessary or warranted?

MR. GIBBS:  Again, I have not and I think it's reasonable to assume that the President has not gone through each and every item in the legislation.  This is necessary to continue funding government.  It represents last year's business.  Although it's not perfect, the President will sign the legislation, but demonstrate for all involved rules moving forward that he thinks can make this process work a little bit better.

Q    Is it going to be a public event?

MR. GIBBS:  I don't know.  The President signs -- certainly some events that he signs things on are public, and some of them are not.

Q    These are the rules of the road?

MR. GIBBS:  Yes.

Q    Back to the G20.  Larry Summers said in a Financial Times interview that the EU, as well as other nations, should try to do more in the way of stimulus, like the U.S. did.  And Mr. Geithner made a similar suggestion last month.  Today the European Union finance ministers rejected that, saying that such suggestions are "not to our liking."  Does this kind of portend two nations, or two bloc nations, getting off on the wrong track as we head off into the G20?  And does that contribute any confidence in the world markets?

MR. GIBBS:  No.  I think that -- I mean, obviously, as we move forward -- look, the President believed that it was important to take aggressive action to move our economy forward through a Recovery and Reinvestment Plan that he was proud to sign into law, and that's moving necessary money out for infrastructure and tax cuts and things like that.

And I answered yesterday the notion that on the agenda in April will be discussion of how we move forward together, as the President discussed at the latter stages of the campaign, that  whether it's stimulus or regulation, that if many nations work collectively in concert, the impact to the global economy will only be sharper and stronger.  And I think that's what the United States and other nations will discuss in April.

Q    But they're saying they won't do that.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, that's why we have summits. 

Q    What -- can I follow up?

MR. GIBBS:  Yes.

Q    Is there a Sherpa named for G20?

MR. GIBBS:  I will check.

MR. HAMMER:  Froman.

MR. GIBBS:  Oh, is it Mike Froman?  Mike Froman, I'm sorry.  Mike Froman.

Yes, sir.

Q    The Vice President today in Europe said that he considered really only 5 percent of the Taliban to be incorrigible -- this just a few days after the President offered up, in a New York Times interview, the prospect of talks with them.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let -- before you -- I would encourage everyone to read the transcript of the interview.

Q    The President's interview or the Vice President's --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I'd certainly read both -- (laughter) -- but I wouldn't -- that would be awkward, wouldn't it?  (Laughter.)

Q    It ain't going to be the first time he had to deal with that.

MR. GIBBS:  No, no.  But -- and I don't --

Q    This wouldn't be the -- (laughter.)

MR. GIBBS:  No, no -- well, but hold on.  Let me -- you know, read exactly what the President said on the plane on Friday.  And I think -- without, again, getting ahead of where you --

Q    Am I misrepresenting the President's comments by saying he --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that -- I think he was asked whether it could make sense to speak with more moderate elements of -- and I think the President lays out pretty clearly that -- as he did -- as Senator McCain, General Petraeus and then-Senator Obama in October of last year did -- that if there are prospects similar to our discussions that -- and efforts that were made that General Petraeus shuttled and was involved in, in Iraq -- if there was the possibility to do something like that, it's possible to look into it as part of -- and again, the President and the administration are undergoing a review of our policy in both Afghanistan and Pakistan.

Q    But General Petraeus didn't just sponsor the talks with the Sunnis in Iraq.  He suggested we should be talking with elements of the Taliban in Afghanistan.  He did so last fall.

MR. GIBBS:  Right.

Q    So my question is, are you on track to do that, are you exploring it, is there a time frame?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I --

Q    Should it be done sooner rather than later?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think this and other important decisions related to Afghanistan and Pakistan are exactly what will be decided and looked at in the administration's review of our policies relating to that region of the country -- I'm sorry -- region of the world.

That's precisely why the review that the President ordered is being undertaken.  And I don't have the date off the top of my head as to when that will be completed, but I assume that that, as well as other decisions will be -- and ideas -- will be studied as part of that review.

Q    On another matter, if I may.  The judge's decision today to accept legal filings -- Judge Stephen Henley's decision to accept legal filings from five inmates at Gitmo -- the President had asked if those proceedings could be halted.  Are you troubled by the judge's action?

MR. GIBBS:  No.  The President -- not unlike our dealings with Afghanistan and Pakistan, we've developed a process to review the status of those at Guantanamo Bay and determine how best to deal with individual detainees and how to bring those that committed horrible acts to justice.  And that continues, as well.

Q    And this decision is consistent with that process?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I'm not a judge in a court of law, but I can -- what I just gave you I think is consistent with what the President has done and what he believes.

Q    Following up slightly on that, Great Britain has decided that it's going to be talking to Hezbollah, and recognizes it as a part of the political fabric of Lebanon.  Given the President's comments about reaching out to some elements of the Taliban, is there a broader discussion about how to engage radical Islamist movements that play important political roles in the Middle East and in Central Asia, including Hamas, that's taking place within the administration?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I don't want to get too far afield on this except to reiterate the President's desire to strongly be engaged in bringing about a long-term and durable peace to the Middle East -- rather than getting into this and that.  Obviously I think the President has stated on a number of occasions that in order for anything like that to happen, there are certain responsibilities that those individual organizations have, including recognizing the right of Israel to exist and renouncing their involvement in terrorist activities.  So I think certainly there are activities and responsibilities that have to be undertaken by those organizations well before this administration can render a judgment.

Q    Robert, to follow on Jim's question on Iraq, the White House has reserved the possibility of rethinking the timetable if conditions on the ground there were to change.  I wonder if you could talk a little bit about what kind of changes you would want to take into consideration, given that the President wanted to withdraw even when violence was much higher a year ago and two years ago.  And what -- is a matter of violence that you would look at and --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me -- I would direct you to either Secretary Gates -- well, primarily Secretary Gates and the Joint Chiefs would have a far greater understanding of the evaluative criteria -- that both was used in making the decision to announce the plan that the President announced, as well as will continue to evaluate the situation on the ground as it relates to -- obviously there are any number of dates upcoming in the calendar aside from what the President announced in terms of agreements that have been signed.  But in terms of specific evaluative criteria, I think I'd point you to the Pentagon.

Q    If there was like an upsurge in violence, that by itself wouldn't --

MR. GIBBS:  They'd have a better idea of criteria.  I don't think it's necessarily in our interest to get into certain hypotheticals about certain -- what those criteria might be.

Q    Why not?  You -- I mean, the White House --

MR. GIBBS:  Because --

Q    -- is making the policy, isn't it?  The generals aren't.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, absolutely.  But the President discussed throughout the campaign that he would consult with commanders on the ground, commanders in the region, the full Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary of Defense and the -- in coming to a decision and a conclusion --

Q    He had many ideas before the -- I mean, during the campaign.

MR. GIBBS:  I think many of those ideas you see instituted in the President's pronouncement about winding down our military and combat commitment in Iraq.  I think the President said throughout the campaign that to make those decisions without the advice of the commanders on the ground is not something that he's interested in doing, as well.

Q    Why don't we know why we're escalating in Afghanistan?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, Helen, we've had this conversation a couple times, but the President -- when the President came into office, sitting on the desk of the Pentagon had been a request from General McKiernan for additional troops in order to deal with what he believed was an ever-growing dangerous situation in Afghanistan.

The President approved additional troops in order to prevent that further deterioration of security in the lead-up to very important elections in that country.  That does not predetermine what decisions might be made at a later date about our force structure pending a regional review, which the President ordered, dealing with Afghanistan and Pakistan.

Mark.

Q    Robert, can I come back to the education speech, and a clarification?  When the President speaks --

MR. GIBBS:  Happy to talk about education.  (Laughter.)

Q    Well, I won't talk about fire.  (Laughter.) 

MR. GIBBS:  Stop, drop and roll.  Go ahead.

Q    Do I get credit for the stock market?

MR. GIBBS:  You know, we'll call it -- we'll make it your rally.

Q    Thank you.  When he speaks of rewarding excellence in -- sorry, rewarding excellence in teaching with extra pay, is he talking about merit pay?  Because we had someone from the NEA -- from the NEA who said, no, he's talking about certifications, that a teacher who achieved extra credentials, they get extra pay.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that what the President's speech outlined today was an expansion of performance pay that the President talked about during the campaign and spoke about in front of town hall meetings and the NEA; included in that is also certification.  But the President believes that school systems can work with teachers and parents to come up with a system that rewards our best teachers with more pay for their excellence in the classroom.  We specifically, I think, highlighted this on one instance in the Denver area, where the school system and teachers worked together to create a plan that was ultimately passed as part of a referendum, that -- part of what was spearheaded by the new senator from Colorado as the superintendent of schools in that area.

I think the statistics are quite clear, and I think it's important for all of us to understand the importance of what teaching means to our students.  It is the single most important -- this is backed up by data -- the single most important factor in determining the outcome of the education of a student.  It's not their parents' background, it's not their income.  It's who the person is standing up in front of that classroom each and every day instructing our children that improves their test scores, that improves their reading and math and enables them to achieve the educational level that they have to, to compete and be successful in our society.  The President believes that we should take steps to reward those teachers.

Q    So he does support merit pay increase for performance.

MR. GIBBS:  He supports the pay for performance, and I think a grand expansion of those ideas across a number of school districts was one of the many things -- including early childhood education, changes in data and innovation -- that I think lay out the strong foundation for an educational reform agenda that the President believes will ultimately lead to increased economic growth.

Ann.

Q    On this his 50th day in office, does the President feel he's about where he expected to be on his policy initiatives?  From the tone of voice this morning it sounded like the criticism that he's tried to do too much has really kind of gotten under his skin.

MR. GIBBS:  No, I -- well, first of all, I will check when I go back to the graph at presidential happiness at the intersection of the 50th day and chart its appropriate progress.  (Laughter.)

Q    Will you release that, please?  (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS:  We're not that transparent, Mark.  (Laughter.)

Q    And is the trend up or down?  (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS:  It depends.  I think I can speak authoritatively to that.

I think that, by any reasonable estimation, what the President and the administration have accomplished in a very short period of time -- even leaving aside the many challenges that we face, the number of things that the President has had to tackle, the number of things that the President has moved through Congress and signed into law, I think not just this administration but I think the American people can be proud of, in getting us on a path towards a sustained economic recovery, understanding that 50 days -- he understood that not all our challenges would be met in 50 days, that there would be much work to do, and that's why, I guess, the founders were graceful enough to extend our tenure beyond that 50-day mark.

But again -- I mean, we -- I talked about this yesterday, and, you know, I think it bears repeating, and that is, if you look at -- if we look at sort of how our economy grew in the first sort of seven or eight years in this decade, I think most economists would at least now go back and tell you that a lot of our "growth" was fueled by questionable mortgage-lending practices and mounds of credit card debt.

I don't think any reasonable economist would also demonstrate for you that that's a long-term path towards sustained economic growth; that we have businesses and families that deal with the rising costs of health care; we have schools that aren't preparing our children and our students to compete in that economy, not just with people in different cities in this country but with kids all across the world; and the choices that we've made relating to energy have put us in a competitive disadvantage, because we're so dependent upon foreign oil -- that all of those things are very much linked to our economic problem.

Much as I've said one solution to the credit crisis isn't likely to solve all of our economic challenges, the President I think strongly believes and, quite frankly, I think the American people understand that our challenges have accumulated largely because for many, many years we've put off making some of those tough decisions.  That's why it's not easy to go out and enumerate some of the things that the President did in his education plan, or as the administration has done on health care and energy, but the President understands it's the right thing to do to move our economy forward.

Q    The President, Robert, said that -- early this year -- that he intended to lay out a new framework for regulating Wall Street and the financial markets by the time of the G20.  It looks like that's slipping slightly, that time frame.  But when does the President believe that new system of regulation needs to be in place, and can realistically be in place, given the pace of the political problems?

MR. GIBBS:  Obviously this is -- we've talked about getting -- the shorthand for how a bill becomes a law.  Obviously any change is going to take time.  The President has started that process with members of Congress -- my 50 days tend to blur together, I can't remember if it was last week or the week before.  But the President remains committed as he did throughout the campaign to ensuring that we have a regulatory framework that meets our 21st century economic system.

The President spoke on Wall Street in September of 2007 and I think talked about a number of problems that our regulatory structure has had to deal with and have become more enlightening over the past many months that have led us to where we are.

Q    Does he believe that system should be in place and can be in place this calendar year?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that the President's hope is that we will move quickly toward that goal.  I don't know that if it was -- I don't think we certainly ever promised it or it would have been realistic to say that that would fully be in place by the beginning of April, given the number of challenges that we had.  But the President remains fully committed to ensuring that that happens quickly, because all of the effort that has been made to change the way we do business, the capital that's been funded in terms of a recovery plan, a housing foreclosure plan to deal with the rising tide of that -- to do all that without putting into that new regulatory restructure just risks repeating the same old mistakes, and I think the President --

Q    Well, he doesn't necessarily mean in 2009.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, that would be the hope.

April.

Q    Robert --

MR. GIBBS:  I know it's been, what, like three days since I called on you.  (Laughter.)

Q    Thank you.  Thank you very much.

MR. GIBBS:  Go ahead.

Q    Okay.  Robert, what is the timeline that this administration has for gauging the stimulus package, if it has worked, if there may need to be another stimulus package?  Many economists are saying that the timeline is six months.

MR. GIBBS:  You know, I haven't -- I haven't seen some of that.  I think the President has appointed in the Vice President, and in the Vice President's staff, and Inspector General, a system that will continually evaluate how money is being spent, evaluate whether that money is being spent on the projects that it should be spent for, and the impact that the taxpayers are getting back for the money that has been spent.

I think the President will also continue to evaluate the trajectory of where the economy is and make determinations of whether we need to do things differently.

In terms of that -- I mean, I think it's important to bear in mind that -- well, two things.  One, it seems like only two weeks ago that the criticism where we were going way too fast and doing way too much --  now it seems the criticism predictably has flipped to the point where we, gasp, didn't do enough.

The President, I think rightly, wants to ensure that what has been done gets into our economic bloodstream in a way that can make as big a change as he intends, and as big a change as he thinks is possible.  But again, we're in the very beginning stages of this, and it's going to take quite some time for that to both work and for us to get a reasonable evaluation.

Q    But do you feel that you're racing against the clock?  Does this administration feel that time is not on its side?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, I think the American people are hurting, and we understand that.  That's why the President took the action that he did.  And as I've said countless times from up here, they also understand it's going to take quite some time for things to turn around.  You don't -- we're not going to just turn a ship around on a dime; it's going to take some time.  And I think people understand that, though they're confident and assured that the President is taking the steps to put in place, as he said, the pillars that need to be in place for that economic recovery.

Yes.

Q    Thank you, Robert.  The President said something interesting that I think the schoolchildren of America might have listened to with great interest, given that we're getting towards the summer, today when he said we should rethink the school year and the school day.  Can you give us a little more insight as to what he's thinking -- of a summer vacation of just a few weeks, or leaving intact the schedule we have, and just adding a little bit?  So can you give us a little more --

MR. GIBBS:  I hope my son didn't hear that portion of today's speech.

No, I think that the President has spoken before, and I think there has been discussion in the education community and in the reform community about either restructuring the amount of time that is spent each day in school, or adding time -- several weeks -- to each school year.  I mean, you know, as far as 10 or 12 years ago, there were active proposals to do this, to add -- to go from, say, roughly 180 to closer to 200 school days.

The President, obviously, thinks that all avenues should be explored in order to improve our educational system.  This is one that advocates have talked about as a possibility of increasing the amount of educational work that is done, that our students do each school year.  Obviously, this is largely in the dominion of states and school districts.

But I think you've also heard the President talk about, and I think he would encourage students and parents alike to use the opportunity of whatever your summer vacation is to continue learning, to continue reading, to continue the activities that are necessary to prepare any student for the next school year.

Q    Right.  That feels pretty differently when you're on vacation, as opposed to being in school.  So you think he's talking more about weeks, not months, in the summer?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, there aren't many months in the summer.

Q    Two months -- three.

MR. GIBBS:  Wow I'm glad I'm not your kids.  No, I'm kidding.  (Laughter.)

Again, I think the President, without getting -- without having a specific number of days that he thinks can and should be added to the school year, I think the President believes it's appropriate for us -- and for school administrators and for state school superintendents that he visited with today -- to evaluate whether or not proposals to add to that school year makes sense.  Because I think -- obviously there's also data that would show you that maybe adding to that school year increases not just what you learned this year, but how you're prepared to learn and what you need to know in order to be ready for that next school year in order to improve learning.

And I think that's -- I think the overall speech today lays out a fairly ambitious plan for education reform, and I think the President, through the stimulus plan and the budget, looks to accomplish a lot of that.

Q    Robert, thanks.  What is the President's view of this resolution on Tibet that's working its way through the House, which accuses China of repression?  And does he agree, or what does he think about the Dalai Lama's comments that China has created hell in Tibet?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I have not -- I have not looked at any resolutions in the House, except to say -- to simply restate our position, that -- (cell phone rings.)

Q    Sorry.  (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS:  That's awesome, by the way.  Right?  That's -- wow.  (Laughter.)  You want to tell everybody what that song was?

Q    No.

MR. GIBBS:  All right.  (Laughter.)  That was pretty cool.  That was -- wow, I don't -- I certainly can't top that with an answer on our policy toward Tibet.  (Laughter.)  But thank you, "Mr. Wendal."

The United States respects the territorial integrity of China and considers Tibet to be part of China.  At the same time we're concerned about the human rights situation in Tibet.  The State Department recently released its annual report on human rights practices for China.  In 2008, the government increased its cultural and religious repression in Tibetan areas, and that we believe that substantive dialogue with the Dalai Lama's representatives that makes progress in bringing about solutions to longstanding issues is the best way to achieve true and lasting stability in Tibet.
Thanks, guys.
END
3:52 P.M. EDT
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/11/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                    March 11, 2009
Press Briefing
By Press Secretary Robert Gibbs
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
2:17 P.M. EDT
MR. GIBBS: All right, ready and away we go.
Q    A couple questions about the earmarks comments and spending bill. The rhetoric that he used on earmarks was remarkably gentle. He wasn't particularly critical of them. He went out of his way to compliment members of Congress in their ability to judge what is good and what is not good for their district. And he also didn't say anything specific to support, for instance, mandatory recision authority -- when he doesn't like a list of things in a bill, to send it to Congress and have them be forced to vote on it, as opposed to that being optional. Can you talk about those two things?
MR. GIBBS: Well, let's talk about it. I mean, I think the President's record on earmark reform throughout his tenure in Washington, no pun intended, has been quite clear. He's called for greater transparency, that names be attached to earmarks, but has also said that this is a process that can and reasonably should be reformed. I think that's exactly what the President talked about today.
I think it's also -- objectively looking at the process, we have seen a decrease in the number of earmarks over the past several years. That's part of good progress. But as the President said today, it was time to take change one step further. He talked about increasing the transparency that's involved, having -- half the reason -- part of the reason we get into these problems is we have what you had today -- was an appropriations bill that, first of all, should have been completed by September 30, 2008. It's now March 11, 2009. It's also a piece of legislation that contains nine of the 13 appropriations bills all lumped into one.
The President spoke today that Congress instead should have bills go through a regular process, be considered one by one. Going through that regular order, increasing that transparency will increase the scrutiny on individual earmarks. That will necessarily cut down the number that are seen in pieces of legislation.
And I think the President was clear that if there are earmarks that get through the process that he thinks are unnecessary, he will work on a vehicle to remove those from our spending priorities.
Q    -- now is that he can request they be removed, and it goes to Congress and they can just shove it in a drawer. Another way to do that is for him to -- the President to have the authority for that list to have to come up for a vote --
MR. GIBBS: To be considered under a certain time frame.
Q    So why wouldn't he come out and endorse that today?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that's -- I think if you look closely at his remarks, he looks forward to working through a process that allows that to happen. And I think that the budget --
Q    I didn't hear him say --
MR. GIBBS: Well, I don't have the remarks in front of me, but I think he was pretty explicit, that if the process -- if something got through the process you could at that point consider a separate piece of legislation to do that. Obviously -- you mentioned this -- it's one thing to stand up and pound your fist -- and certainly the President has done that -- about a process that he believes is out of control. But now we have to work with Congress to institute reforms that can work, because as you mentioned, it doesn't do anybody any good to send up a recisions package that becomes a piece of paper in somebody's file drawer. That's why --
Q    So he wants to have --
MR. GIBBS: Well, he would like to work with Congress to figure out a process to make something like that possible. That's why the Director of OMB mentioned yesterday, in testifying to Congress, that if -- that his department is looking through the spending bill, will make a recommendation -- staff will make a recommendation about proceeding further with that.
And don't take my word for it -- you rarely do, anyway -- (laughter) --
Q    Me?
MR. GIBBS: I don't mean you, personally, I meant you all. (Laughter.)
Q    -- pick me out.
MR. GIBBS: I know. Did that hurt? Did that seem stunning? (Laughter.)
Q    We don't have to sit here and take this. (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: But I think that -- you know, look at somebody like Norm Ornstein, who's followed Congress and watched the process of appropriations go back and forth, and understand that today marks -- I think what he said was the beginning of significant -- or continued significant reform on this process. Obviously we've seen the process in past years get out of control and the President is encouraged to take steps to bring about some control.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, we understand the President will be meeting with the Chinese Foreign Minister on Thursday. To what extent will the naval confrontation this week overshadow that meeting? And secondly, will the President bring up China's currency with the Foreign Minister? And as an addendum to that, to what extent will that be important at the G20 meeting, as well?
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me say that the Foreign Minister will meet with Secretary Clinton today; will meet tomorrow with National Security Advisor Jim Jones, and they will both meet then with the President. The President looks forward to discussing issues of mutual concern with the Chinese Foreign Minister, including our global economic crisis, and the incident involving the boats of the two countries will be on that list for discussion. I don't think it will overshadow it, but I think the President will continue to make clear our country's position.
Q    Is currency an area of mutual concern?
MR. GIBBS: I would probably put that under the global economic crisis and a number of other issues that will be on the agenda that the President looks forward to talking to the Foreign Minister about.
Q    Robert, following on what Jennifer was saying about gentle rhetoric from the President today, when you mentioned that Congress didn't get nine of the 13 appropriations bills done, that's something the Democratic Congress -- his fellow Democrats failed to get those bills done last year. Now Mitch McConnell today, the Republican Leader, was saying that when you add up the $787 billion stimulus, you add on the $410 billion the President is about to sign for omnibus, that's a billion dollars an hour in 50 -- 51 days. When the American people look at that, is that really change to the way Washington is working?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I probably shouldn't engage an individual Senator who ran Congress for a number of years where deficits set records, and I won't do something like that today. I mean, I -- (laughter.)
Q    Tomorrow maybe?
MR. GIBBS: Or later in this briefing. (Laughter.)
Q    But the President is signing these now. Regardless of what Mitch McConnell did before, the President is signing --
MR. GIBBS: Well, but hold on, let's not -- I'm asked about the debt every day. That's not exactly -- let's not exactly put aside --
Q    That's last year's business, right?
MR. GIBBS: No, I -- well, according to some in the Senate, it was last hour's business. The President has proposed a return to fiscal sanity, and a path towards fiscal responsibility.
Look, here's what I would say -- I'll break my campaign promise and engage the Senator from Kentucky, and any senator or representative in Congress. They're -- it is certainly within one's right to criticize the budget. That's -- we get that. I think the best way for him to put forward a budget that we can look at and debate and see whether there's honest accounting -- whether we take into account natural disasters, paying for wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the possibility of continued financial stability, investments in health care, education, and energy independence -- I think the best way to do that is for Senator McConnell, and anybody else, to put forward a budget plan that does those things and puts ourselves on a path towards fiscal responsibility. I think that's the best way to have the debate joined.
It's an important debate that we're having, and I think it's important that, as Mr. Buffett said, we work constructively together to try to solve our economic challenges. But that's all part of the process.
Q    Why did the President apply a different standard of "this is last year's business" for this legislation, when in things like TARP, when he was President-elect, he reached out to then-President Bush and said, look, we need to authorize the other $350 billion -- even though TARP was last October, it was clearly last year's business --
MR. GIBBS: Well, no, no. let's be fair, Ed.
Q    I am being fair.
MR. GIBBS: Okay, well, let's understand -- how does the next $350 billion get triggered?
Q    It's triggered by the President --
MR. GIBBS: No, it gets triggered by the Senate. The Senate had to -- I'm sorry, one House of the Congress had to basically authorize the re-spending of that money. So that was something that was put in by last Congress -- at our request certainly -- I mean this -- but it's not a -- trust me, having listened to some of those phone calls, it wasn't a one-sided deal. Triggering an additional amount of money in order to be spent in the current -- isn't last year's business.
Q    There are a whole host of things like that, that President Bush -- you've said you inherited from President Bush, but you're not running away from them -- like Iraq timetable. The President followed through on that, said --
MR. GIBBS: I'm glad to see you --
Q    Okay, the question is, on this piece of legislation, the President used the principle: This is last year's business. So even though it's got all kinds of things I don't like, I'm going to sign it anyway. Okay? There are a whole bunch of other things he got from President Bush that he doesn't like either. And he's going to change -- President Bush didn't want to have a timetable in Iraq, but President Obama came in and said, we're going to put that timetable -- I campaigned on that. Well, he campaigned on earmarks, as well, pulling them out of these bills. Where is the consistency?
MR. GIBBS: I'm having a lot of trouble connecting the dots in your -- I mean, I suppose the President could have come in and assumed that people weren't in Iraq, but I don't understand your analogy.
Q    You're saying this legislation is last year's business, but he's signing it into law this year. He could have vetoed it. Why wouldn't he veto it?
MR. GIBBS: Let me give you last -- let me give you yesterday's answer. The President believes that, despite protestations, that appropriations bills designed to be completed before September 30th of the previous year are last year's business. I think any reasonable look at the appropriations process would understand that. The President believes that, moving forward, dozens and dozens of appropriations bills will cross his desk because he's asked, first and foremost, that Congress not lump large bills together. And to be fair, that's done virtually every year; six to nine of these appropriations bills get glommed on at the very end or go into overtime in order to do that -- that changing the rules going forward were important because the President is best able to have an impact on that legislation moving forward.
That's what the President enumerated through transparency and a full set of earmark reforms that -- I bet when we look back on a year or two from now we'll see a decrease in the number of spending projects, just as the President has asked that we put ourselves back on a path toward fiscal responsibility through a budget that will cut the deficit in half in just four years.
Yes, ma'am.
Q    Earlier in the Oval Office this morning the President said we're doing a very good job of stimulating the economy here at home. Is the President ready to declare the stimulus a success? Does he know something that the rest of us don't?
MR. GIBBS: No, I think the -- well, I think the statement was made in relation to what other countries around the world have done in terms of economic recovery packages. I think if you look at what some people have said -- specifically the IMF -- about the amount of economic stimulus that countries should put forward, that a number of the countries that we're going to visit that take part in the G20 have not put a great deal of money forward to stimulate the economy.
Obviously, $787 billion spread out over two years represents a sizeable investment in getting that economy moving forward. And the President is proud that Congress passed, appropriated, and he signed into law an investment of that size -- as he said last September, as part of the economic crisis, the best way for our country to move forward in a globally connected economy undergoing a global recession would be for all our countries to act together. And he hopes that other countries -- many that he'll see at the G20 -- will act as the United States has.
Obviously the President isn't declaring victory on economic recovery. He is certainly declaring some victory in the fact that Congress listened to the urgent appeals of the American people to put forward a plan to create jobs and put money back into taxpayers' pockets -- and that's exactly what Congress did and exactly what he signed into law.
Q    So who should do more?
MR. GIBBS: Again, I would point out to the many people -- I'd subtract G1 from G20. (Laughter.)
Q    Have there been any conversations with the Hill about a second stimulus? And does it concern the White House if staffers up there are actually working on one just in case?
MR. GIBBS: I honestly don't know if there have been any conversations. Again, I think the onus is on all of government and all levels of government to institute effectively and in a transparent way the stimulus package that Congress has approved -- that that's the onus that we have.
I think I said -- a few weeks ago we were trying to do too much; now some think we're doing too little. I think it speaks to the notion, as I've said many times, that we have to -- there are a number of different things that have to be done in order to both stabilize our financial system and see our economy grow again.
Chuck.
Q    Two questions. Does the President think Congress works well? He seemed to be upset that he had to deal with last year's business. Is that a judgment on his part that Congress could do a better job?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I don't think that -- you know, as I said earlier, I think there are -- I think a number of -- in any number of years, if you go back and look, there have been omnibus spending bills. That's one of the reasons that the President outlined a proposal that would see the appropriations process happen in a more coordinated fashion with both parties and in both Houses, where individual appropriations bills would go through the process and be considered individually. I think the President believes if we do that, that you're likely to scrutinize those individual pieces of legislation more and that that scrutiny and transparency will result in earmark reform.
Q    So does the President approve or disapprove of the job Congress is doing --
MR. GIBBS: I do not know if he was called in the Gallup Poll that showed that Congress's approval rating is at a 4-year high. I do not believe he was one of the thousand or so respondents.
Q    Three different sort of big voices in the economy have called this -- said that the White House and that all of Washington should be on a warlike footing when it comes to the economy. Thomas Friedman did it; Steve Pearlstein did it; Warren Buffett did it. Do you accept that comparison, that this is a war -- the economic crisis is sort of -- we should be on a warlike footing?
MR. GIBBS: I think that the economic crisis that America is facing and, quite frankly, that the world is facing, I think anybody that looked at it reasonably would understand that it is as challenging a time as this country has faced in 50 or 60 years, including any problem that we've seen foreign or domestic. Now, I don't think that should -- I don't think it cuts down on the -- I mean, some have intimated that because of that there shouldn't be dissent. I think the President doesn't subscribe to that. The President believes that good ideas are not the province of just one political party and that the -- that's why the President has reached out to Democrats and Republicans in order to try to find those good ideas.
But I don't -- I think the challenges that we face, there's no doubt, are as big as any we've seen and our economy is challenged unlike it's been since World War II.
Laura.
Q    Thank you. Why didn't the President ask for an outright ban on private sector earmarks, as he did when he was a senator? And why do you think the Senate leadership is resisting even the more modest proposal that he put forth?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think on the second question, I think that's a better question for individual or groups of senators that share those concerns. I think the President believes that the process that sees any spending go through -- any private earmark go through the rigor of what a contracting process would be for the federal government, I think if it's good enough for that it would be good enough for private earmarks.
Q    Why not just have a -- why not just ban it? I mean, if it can go through a competitive -- through the normal federal funding process, why do you need an earmark that's going to benefit a for-profit company?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I would, I guess, posit that question to members of Congress with -- that have proposed that.
I think what the President has proposed today, though, is a fairly sweeping agenda to deal with earmarks. I think that's what he set out to do. And again, I think when we sit back here months and years from now we'll see that that's had an impact on this process.
Q    Given that some of the strongest people on this issue, including Senator McCain, has come out negatively towards this proposal, do you think that the President has taken any hit on his own sort of reputation on fiscal responsibility?
MR. GIBBS: No. I think when you compare what he's done on this issue not just today, but over the course of several years, and in proposing a budget that is more fiscally responsible than any budget that's been proposed in quite some time in Washington, the credentials of somebody seeking fiscal responsibility I think are in quite good shape.
Mark.
Q    Robert, did the President even consider a veto of the omnibus bill?
MR. GIBBS: I don't -- I could go back and ask him if at any point it crossed his mind. It seems somewhat moot, since when the bill comes down he'll sign it.
Q    Well, is he signing it for political purposes, because of the political pressure from members of Congress to get it signed?
MR. GIBBS: No, I think he's signing it because the funding for the government expires at the end of the day.
Q    Can you give us an example of some of the earmarks he regards as the most heinous?
MR. GIBBS: As soon as the OMB comes back with that list, and if there's a recommendation for recisions we'll certainly send that up to Capitol Hill.
Q    Robert, I'd like to go to the auto talks and task force. Has the President given any guidelines to the task force -- they've met in Detroit a few days ago -- has he offered any guidelines to the task force? And I have a follow-up.
MR. GIBBS: Well, the --
Q    Other than he wants it preserved and --
MR. GIBBS: Well, I have to go back and look at some of my notes. But I know the President met as part of his regular economic daily briefing, I want to say last week -- I'll go back and look at my notes -- with several members of the task force to get an update on where the process was. As you know, those members were in Detroit on Monday to speak with the auto companies and members representing the auto workers because we're obviously getting closer and closer to the end of the month where it's likely that action will have to be taken. I don't think the President has come up with -- I don't think he's been presented with specific plans yet, other than I would just reiterate what he said in his speech to Congress, that we need an auto industry in this country, but the auto industry is likely to be one in the future that is restructured and re-imagined from where it is today so that Americans are buying cars built by and for Americans.
Q    One of the things that he, and I think you have said, too, that all sides must give a little. When it comes to wages, GM pays an average worker around $57 an hour, whereas Toyota pays its U.S. workers about $49 an hour. Does he believe that the GM wages need to come down as a part of that giving?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think what the President has talked about, and I think this is true for many of the members on Capitol Hill, that to have that reimagined, retooled auto industry, each side is going to have to be involved in talks that give a little, and that --
Q    Including wages?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that given the gravity of the situation, I think things involving both the auto workers and auto companies are on the table to discuss.
Major.
Q    A couple of housekeeping on the stimulus -- I mean the omnibus. Is he going to sign that in public? And if not, why not?
MR. GIBBS: I don't know the answer to when the signature will be because it hasn't come down from Congress. I don't -- I don't think there are any more -- I don't -- if the bill has to be signed today, there's no signing ceremonies that are public today.
Q    Why not?
MR. GIBBS: No reason other than the fact that some things are signed in public, and some aren't. (Laughter.)
Q    You said the President's has brought fiscal sanity to the process. Would the President generally regard most of the earmarks in the omnibus fiscally sane, or fiscally insane?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think in order to establish some degree of sanity, the President has instructed his budget office to go through the legislation.
Q    That's the category they would fall in if they end up in a recisions package --
MR. GIBBS: Say again?
Q    That's the category they would fall in if they end up in a recisions package, the insane category?
MR. GIBBS: I don't know if that's exactly the name we'll give the bill -- (laughter) -- but we'll certainly take that under advisement.
Q    Is now a good time, Robert, to demote the drug czar out of the Cabinet-level position when there's a rather active shooting drug war going on in Mexico, which is of great concern to border states, the spillover violence, et cetera?
MR. GIBBS: Well, obviously, the situation in Mexico is of -- remains a concern of this administration. It's something that the President spoke to President Calderón about when they met in January before President Obama was inaugurated. The President has respect and admiration for the Mexican President for taking on the drug cartels. Admiral Mullen was in Mexico and the President spoke -- last week -- and the President with him to get an update on the seriousness of the situation.
Q    But to those who think this --
MR. GIBBS: Right, well, --
Q    -- appears to be a demotion in the midst of this crisis.
MR. GIBBS: Well, I would say that I'd -- there are a lot of people that work in the White House, that the President wouldn't be nominating somebody that didn't have full and complete access to him and every apparatus in government in order to bring about changes in security and in our drug policy. And I think that advocates can be assured that the President has nominated somebody that takes this quite seriously, that's been working on this issue for quite some time.
And certainly the situation in Mexico is likely to involve many different departments. And again, Admiral Mullen was there representing the Joint Chiefs. I think Secretary Napolitano will visit soon. Obviously the Department of Homeland Security, Office of Drug -- National Drug Control Policy, and many others will be involved in ensuring that the situation and the violence don't spread.
Q    A quick one on Pakistan. Does the White House believe the "long march" should be allowed to go on as scheduled tomorrow?
MR. GIBBS: The?
Q    The "long march" in Pakistan to Islamabad. Many judges have been jailed, opposition figures have been arrested, there's a crackdown on --
MR. GIBBS: Let me get you something on that. I don't have it --
Q To follow Major's question on Mexico and the drug czar's demotion, for lack of a better word, I mean, can we -- could this signify a shift in the administration's approach, away from more law enforcement/militarized approach in some of these countries to one that emphasizes an attack on the demand side and treatment here?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that -- I think in order for any country to make progress in dealing with this issue, that if you only deal with one part of this issue -- and let's add treatment and prevention into the list of things that you talked about -- it's a little -- I guess it's a little bit like our economic problems -- there's not simply one thing to do in order to make progress on this issue.
But let me address the czar question for a minute, because I think I've been asked in this room any number of times if the czars in our White House to deal with energy and health care had too much power. We've added now a director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, assuming the same title and access that many of the people that I've been questioned by whether they were too powerful. I think just as the drug czar will, and most people do, have full access to the President of the United States to make important decisions.
Peter.
Q    Robert, last week 13 humanitarian groups were kicked out of Darfur because of the -- or following the indictment of Bashir. The activist groups are writing the President today asking him to show some leadership to try to get those groups back in. One in a million people are without food aid and potable water and health care. What is the President doing, if anything, on this to get those groups back in?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think last night he spoke on this with Secretary General Ban Ki-moon in saying clearly that decisions that have been made by the government of Sudan that affect greatly the safety and security of the people of Sudan should be reversed. I think the President has been clear on that for a number of days, including the very first day when news broke about this -- asking that the government, in order to protect its people, show restraint in any of its actions.
Obviously that hasn't completely been followed and the decisions that the government has made to expel those NGOs that protect innocent people, those decisions should be reversed.
Q    Would he send somebody to talk to Bashir about it? Would he do something at the U.N. beyond talking to Ban Ki-moon?
MR. GIBBS: We may have more on that later in the week, but I don't have any update on that now.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, the President talked this morning in his meeting with Secretary Geithner about helping the developing countries' emerging markets. Can you talk about how you sell that and, in particular, the idea of substantially boosting the U.S. commitment to the IMF's emergency fund --
MR. GIBBS: Well, I mean, I think it's been well documented as we lead into the G20 that the demand for exports is greatly down across the world and that that is going to hit many emerging countries that our businesses and companies sell to -- is going to be -- those countries are going to be and those markets are going to be hit hardest. As the President said, we are part of and connected to a global economy; that we have to take steps in order to ensure the continued demand for American goods overseas; that there are markets that we can sell in and that the President will work with other nations and the big economies of the G20 to do just that, to ensure that those markets and that assistance gets to -- that those markets are open and that assistance allows the flow of goods and services that will not just help those developing countries, but also to help American business.
Again, I think it's part of a process that -- whereby many things have to happen to get our economy moving again, and that opening -- ensuring export -- the demand for exports from American companies into those emerging economies is certainly part of that long-term economic growth.
Q    What tools does the President have to -- this is back on earmarks -- what tool does the President have to enforce the rules he laid out today? I mean, Senator McCain during the campaign said he'd veto any bill that came before him with earmarks. Would the President veto bills that don't follow his rules, or what's his enforcement?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think you certainly mentioned one of them. I think you -- obviously the President has the ability to, as was mentioned earlier, send up legislation to have certain ideas and earmarks rescinded as part of the legislative process. Obviously the President possesses a nice pulpit from which to call out projects that he believes are unnecessary.
And I think that the President will use many of the tools in his toolbox in order to ensure greater transparency and reform in the system. The President understands that in these economic times, that we have to spend wisely the taxpayer's money and he certainly intends to do that, and I think has demonstrated that with a number of reforms since coming into office.
Steve.
Q    Robert, what does the President think about the D.C. scholarship program? The spending bill zeroes out and cuts the money for it.
MR. GIBBS: The President -- as I've said I think last week, the President doesn't believe that vouchers are a long-term answer to our educational problems and the challenges that face our public school system, where the vast majority of students are educated in this country. The President laid out a fairly robust education reform plan yesterday. But the President I think understands that there are -- it wouldn't make sense to disrupt the education of those that are in that system, and I think we'll work with Congress to ensure that a disruption like that doesn't take place.
Q    So will he propose in his full budget to restore that funding for those kids already in the program?
MR. GIBBS: I'd certainly look through the budget stuff, but I think, whether it's in the budget or in the appropriations process, that we look for a way to work with -- work with Congress to ensure, as I said, that disruption doesn't take place.
April.
Q    Robert, two things. What's the concern from the White House about Adolfo Carrion -- this current controversy about him, this possible conflict of interest?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think -- I don't have a whole lot to add from what was in -- has been in the papers and what Mr. Carrion has said about this.
Q    But are you concerned that he has not, or will not, pay this alleged $32,000 for this porch and balcony? I mean, is that -- is that all he needs to do? What does he need to do to clear up this controversy in the White House's opinion?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think -- again, I think the quote says, that when the work is complete, that the bill will be paid, and certainly that would be the expectation.
Q    And also, on Darfur. Right now the ICC's arrest warrant on Bashir, it's basically symbolic. And the President has talked about the issues of Africa and Darfur when he was a candidate. Is he going to try to help put some teeth behind what is viewed as something symbolic, as you say, possibly this week?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I make it a practice not to get ahead of anything that he may do or say --
Q    Just this once.
MR. GIBBS: Well, I appreciate the opportunity to do so. I will decline. But I think that -- again, I think the -- I don't -- I certainly don't think it's symbolic to sit in the Oval Office and ask that decisions about NGOs and the protection of innocent people be reconsidered. I think that's -- those are certainly important. And the President obviously has great concern and hopes to see progress in peace in that area. And I think that's what he's worked to do.
Q    Does the President agree with Chas Freeman that he was unfairly driven out by --
MR. GIBBS: I haven't talked to the President about it.
Q    Do you agree?
MR. GIBBS: I don't have anything to add from what Admiral Blair discussed yesterday in accepting Mr. Freeman's decision that his nomination not proceed and that he regretted it.
Q    In reference to Guantanamo Bay, there have been reports that you're close to naming an envoy to handle closing issues. Is that accurate? And if so --
MR. GIBBS: I have no policy pronouncements about that from here today.
Q    Thank you.
MR. GIBBS: Thank you, guys.
Q    Any information on travel next week?
Q    How about the schedule for the rest of this week?
Q    Yes, how about -- (laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: What's today, Wednesday?
Q    Or a day ahead? That worries me. (Laughter.) That worries me.
MR. GIBBS: Yes, what is -- yes, I have no clue what day it is. Now I'm drawing a blank. Oh, that's right.
Q    The China Foreign Minister --
MR. GIBBS: The China Foreign Minister will be here with the President -- I should let you do this. This should be a -- no offense, you know more about it than me.
The President will speak tomorrow afternoon, I believe, to members of the Business Roundtable. There's an event, I know, here at the White House on Friday. I will check about whether we're talking about the content of that yet. I know --
Q    -- one of your economic --
MR. GIBBS: The economic -- Vice President Biden will meet with officials representing each state. They're in charge of coordinating recovery money. That's tomorrow, late -- I believe late morning. The Business Roundtable is in the afternoon. Friday there's an event. And then next -- I think this is right, and we'll advise this a little bit later on today -- Wednesday afternoon, next Wednesday afternoon, the President will head to I believe it's southern California for a day and a half to discuss the economy. All right?
Q    Is it -- is just the Vice President going to take part in the stimulus thing tomorrow?
MR. GIBBS: The President -- it's my understanding the President will stop by that event, but he's the main --
Q    What's the topic with the Business Roundtable? Is it the economy or --
MR. GIBBS: It is.
Q    Surprisingly.
END                  2:58 P.M. EDT
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/12/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                                   March 12, 2009
BRIEFING BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:51 P.M. EDT
MR. GIBBS: Good afternoon. Mr. Babington, start us off? Let the record reflect that an N.C. State alum has asked a Tar Heel to start the questions. (Laughter.)
Q Very kind of you, and good luck tonight.
MR. GIBBS: In the spirit of what can only be said is bipartisanship. (Laughter.)
Q Robert, can you tell us anything -- there's a report that a suspected U.S. missile strike killed as many as seven people in northwest Pakistan. Do you have anything for us on that?
MR. GIBBS: I don't. And I don't -- and I wouldn't comment on something like that from this podium.
Q If I may ask a different question then. On the omnibus spending bill, is the President going to ask for Congress to rescind any items, and if so, roughly how many might be in that?
MR. GIBBS: Well, the President obviously enumerated concerns -- some concerns that he's had with the process, and has mentioned throughout this process concerns he had with the legislation. He's asked the Office of Management and Budget to review the legislation and come back; staff will make a recommendation regarding whether a recisions package should go forward or not. So that review is current and ongoing.
Q Any idea when that might --
MR. GIBBS: No. I can certainly check with those guys, but it's an ongoing review.
Yes, ma'am.
Q France and Germany have rejected the U.S. calls for a stimulus, and the President outlined a dual goal of pushing stimulus at G20 and also revamping financial regulations. Does this alter his message at the summit, or how is he going to get around that objection?
MR. GIBBS: Let me -- I think -- and as I talked about this I think it was last week, that the President looks at his trip to the London economic summit in -- not as an either/or, but as a both/and proposition; that we have two equally important ideas and messages for that summit, and the first is that we must manage and overcome the current economic crisis that the world finds itself in, and then we must also take steps to prevent future crises from happening to the global economy.
What the President and what this country will do -- we're not going to negotiate some specific economic percentage or commitment, but continue to talk about the notion that, as the President has talked for some time, that it is important that the world act together in growing our economy, as well as that we together take steps to ensure that the crisis doesn't happen again.
Obviously different -- different international bodies have said that the global economy is likely to contract at about 2 percent of GDP over the course of the next two years, and that their recommendation is that countries stimulate their economy to that degree. That's in large measure what the United States has done, and the President will talk to other nations of the G20 about acting together in hopes of doing the same without, again, negotiating some specific commitment.
And then obviously it's incredibly important, and the administration has begun to work on reworking our financial regulatory system here in America to ensure, as I've said, that the crisis that we've -- we are experiencing now, the same factors don't lead us to experience that crisis again.
Q But if you already have two countries saying no to that, how does he get around that?
MR. GIBBS: Well, as I said yesterday, I think partly that's what -- that's what summits are for. I think we're going to talk to other countries and other nations about continuing to do what's necessary to get through this crisis. But again, this isn't -- I also think it's important that we not think of this event as just simply one moment in time. Obviously once we're done with the summit, people are going to have to evaluate both where their economies are and where the global economy is, and make changes. So obviously the President looks forward to talking to leaders about a shared agenda to manage the crisis that we're in, and to also prevent a future crisis from happening.
Jake, happy birthday.
Q Thank you. Yesterday, in an interview with a bunch of regional newspapers, President Obama suggested that congressional Republicans needed to do more than just say no to what the President and Democrats are proposing, they needed to present alternatives when it comes to stimulating the economy.
How does the President reconcile that with the meeting he had with bicameral, bipartisan congressional leaders, in I think January, where House Republicans gave the President a list of ideas, and the President said, I don't see anything crazy on this list, but few of them, if any, were incorporated into the stimulus? It seems that there's a disconnect.
MR. GIBBS: Is this -- are you talking about the meeting that we went to before the President was sworn in, in early January?
Q Whenever he told Congressman Cantor --
Q Was it the second or third day here at the White House?
Q First week as President.
Q Cantor gave him a list of things, of suggestions, things they wanted to see in the stimulus. The President said, I don't see anything crazy on this list. But the Republicans say none of them were incorporated -- or few of them were incorporated into the stimulus bill.
MR. GIBBS: Right. I do think -- I think if you go back and look at the bill, I do think, as you just mentioned, some of their ideas were incorporated. The earlier meeting that we did on Capitol Hill had the same congressman, Eric Cantor, suggesting that in order for the American people to see transparently what the administration was spending the taxpayer money on for economic recovery, that a web site be created so that the public could track that funding. That's exactly what the administration has done.
And I made a similar argument here yesterday, not just on recovery, but on the budget. We have members of Congress rightly concerned about the growth of deficits and debt. Yet at the same time, one of the primary drivers of a deficit and a debt are our obligations to Medicare and Medicaid and health care spending.
If they're concerned about the deficit, the best way to exercise that concern, if you're critical of what the administration has proposed, would be to come up with, as I said yesterday, an honest budgeting document that pays for both wars, that pays -- takes into account natural disasters, or future money for economic and financial stability -- and does so in a way that demonstrates clearly for the American people that you're putting this country back on a path towards fiscal responsibility and fiscal sustainability. Certainly the President would welcome looking at the administration -- I'm sure all of Congress would welcome looking at a document very similar to that.
Q If the President incorporated some of -- or if the Democrats on Capitol Hill and the President incorporated some of the Republican ideas, why would the President say the Republican Party is a party of no ideas?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I do think you've heard certainly recently a lot more criticism than you've heard suggestions. I think you've -- I think the obligation of anybody involved of -- to quote my friend Warren Buffett again -- that he certainly made mention of the fact that Democrats and Republicans, because of the gravity of the situation and the many challenges that we face, should work together. I think working together would include sharing ideas on both sides of the aisle about what has to be done.
There's co-equal branches of government. I think it's important that everybody be involved in a healthy debate about the solutions that might surround a recovery plan and how to get our economy growing for the long term.
Q Robert, two topics -- one on Mexico. The President yesterday also told those regional reporters he's thinking about sending National Guard troops down to the U.S.-Mexico border to deal with all the escalating violence down there. Give us an idea of the timetable, whether this would be days or weeks away from a decision. And how extensive might the U.S. military involvement be?
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me -- I think there was a couple of different articles from the same interview that came to different conclusions about what the same person in one room might have said. What -- and I can certainly get you the transcript of this if you don't already have it -- but the President enumerated again that our long-term challenges relating to many policy decisions around the border are not going to be solved in that long term through the militarization of the border.
Obviously there have been specific requests that have come for additional National Guard troops to be deployed there based on the escalating violence in Mexico. The President has committed to reviewing those requests along with Secretary Napolitano to give those requests the appropriate airing that they deserve. I don't know from DHS of a timeline of a recommendation or decision on that, but I know that he will certainly take their ask under advisement.
Q Another topic -- on the economy. Bill Marriott has an op-ed in the Washington Post today saying that business travel is way down and part of it is attacks from lawmakers and from the administration about business travel and -- seems to be referring in part to when the President said, don't go to Las Vegas, don't go to the Super Bowl --
MR. GIBBS: Well, let's be clear about what the President said. I don't think the President said "Don't go to Las Vegas" or "Don't go to Hawaii" or "Don't go to the Super Bowl" -- I forget where the Super Bowl was --
Q Tampa.
MR. GIBBS: Tampa. "Don't go to Tampa." If you have -- it's getting warm; if you've got the desire and the wherewithal to travel to any of those places, to quote a famous Southerner, Lewis Grizzard said, "Delta is ready when you are."
What the President expressed some concern about was companies that are getting large amounts of public funding, taxpayer funding, through a financial stabilization plan, that the President does have great concern with public money being used for that.
But the President believes it's important to have a strong tourism industry and that it's important that, as the President said earlier, that the -- or late last week, that we shouldn't retrench or pull back from; that he would encourage people to travel. His concern -- the concern that he specifically expressed had to do with the use of taxpayer -- or the use of money by institutions that have received a lot of assistance from the taxpayers. Obviously that's not something that he would think appropriate.
Q I understand in private he told some business leaders he's concerned his comments may have been construed and hurt the tourism industry. Does he have any regrets about what he said?
MR. GIBBS: I think the President, despite what some people heard, I think was very clear about the delineations between families or even businesses traveling versus the need to ensure that appropriate protections are in place for taxpayer assistance that are used to help financial institutions stabilize themselves; that they were -- that money was -- is being spent and we assume it will be spent with great care.
Yes, sir.
Q You mentioned the web site a little while ago on the stimulus, recovery.gov, and there are some Republicans on the Hill who have been studying that thing pretty closely and they're coming to an early conclusion -- they're a bit frustrated that it only shows the money going so far; that it may show it going from a department to a state and then maybe from a state to the city, but then it doesn't go beyond that, it doesn't show which contractors it goes to. Is it the goal and the commitment of the White House to show the money going absolutely to the end of the transaction?
MR. GIBBS: Chip, I'd have to -- I have to admit I haven't Googled quite that far on recovery.gov.
Q But this is a principle. Is it the goal of the White House to show the money going to the very end of the transaction chain?
MR. GIBBS: Well, the principle is to be transparent. Again, I'd have to get a stronger sense of what their individual critique is and how far you can go on recovery.gov, but we'll certainly look through that.
Q Okay. And Democrats also -- raising their ugly heads today, but -- on the Hill -- Kent Conrad -- (laughter) -- actually he's a very handsome man. (Laughter.) Kent Conrad said today, was talking about the $634 billion for health care over the next 10 years with Geithner, and he said, "Some of us have real pause about the notion of putting substantially more money into the health care system when we've already got a bloated system." So even Democrats are --
MR. GIBBS: The President would -- the President would have agreed with that.
Q On the $634 billion?
MR. GIBBS: No, the President would have agreed that a substantial investment in a health care system that doesn't work and is bloated shouldn't continue. But that's why -- that's why the President included in his budget substantial, I would mention, free market cuts in certain Medicare Advantage programs that offer large subsidies for programs that the President doesn't believe need extra subsidies to do what's already being done with other insurance.
The President met with Senate Democrats on the budget yesterday, including Chairman Conrad. I think Chairman Conrad had positive things to say about the meeting and the budget. But the President himself, in the budget, has taken steps to ensure that those efficiencies that we have not seen in our health care system -- I've certainly said from this podium a number of times that we pay more than virtually every industrialized country in the world for an outcome that doesn't equal other industrialized countries.
The President has no desire to continue to fund what doesn't work. But the President has taken steps to make some changes in the efficiencies of the way health care works, in order to ensure that health care costs go down and that people have the appropriate access that they need to the health care that they deserve.
There continues to be quite a bit of debate about whether health care or energy independence or investing in education is part of our overall -- whether it should be part of an overall economic plan, or whether the President, because of pure whimsy, has decided to tackle additional problems. I think the President will speak about this later today, before taking questions from CEOs at the Business Roundtable. I think he'll address this argument quite clearly.
I mentioned this a few days ago myself. The President will say that we have seen over the course of seven or eight -- the last seven or eight years, economic growth largely funded by two things: one, overheated speculation in the real estate market; and two, economic growth by families getting multiple credit cards and maxing them out.
The President believes that bubble-to-bubble economic growth is not long-term, sustained economic growth that makes sense for this country; that we need a post-bubble economic model that has investments in what's necessary to reduce our deficits, to make those necessary investments that we've ignored for so long, and use that to create the jobs of the future -- putting people back to work, again, with sustained, long-term economic growth.
We just can't have our economy grow once some sector identifies a bubble, and everybody gets involved in that bubble until it pops, and then we wait for the next bubble to be created. That's not the way our economy grew for decades, and it's certainly not a sustainable way to grow the economy for decades to come.
Chuck.
Q Robert, in the hopes of making the folks in North Dakota happy, so that we mention both of their U.S. senators -- (laughter) -- Byron Dorgan and John McCain did an op-ed, I think it was on Sunday, calling for a 9/11-style commission, Iraq study group -- whatever you want to call it -- to study the economic crisis, to figure out -- unwind it, what happened. How did this happen? How did it go to this conversation you were just having, bubble to bubble? You had -- you were saying that that's what it is. But to have some sort of investigative body outside of Congress, outside the White House -- would the President support something like that?
MR. GIBBS: I can talk to him and the economic advisors to see whether they've read that, and what their feeling is on a commission to study the problem. I will tell you the President's focus, and as is his economic team, is making sure that we take urgent and necessary steps to create jobs, to put money into taxpayers' pockets, to ensure that our home foreclosure crisis doesn't spread, to ensure stability in the financial markets; that we do all of the things that we need to do as well as investing in the things I just spoke about to create that long-term growth.
I think that's, without giving an opinion on that until I talk to them, I think our strong priority is working each and every day to ensure that this administration is taking the steps and putting the pillars in place for an economic recovery for the American people.
Q And did the White House Counsel's Office -- on a quick separate subject -- did the White House Counsel's Office know that your nominee for chief technology officer -- that there was this FBI sting going on? Did you guys at least have a heads-up about this before you made that --
MR. GIBBS: I believe the Department of Justice, at some point during the morning, informed the White House Counsel.
Q Before you guys -- you knew this before the President made a decision about --
MR. GIBBS: Before the decision --
Q -- before the President made the decision to nominate --
MR. GIBBS: No, no, no, no.
Q This was just today?
MR. GIBBS: Let me be clear. I thought your question was about today.
Q No, no, no. I meant, did you know in advance that there was an investigation going on.
MR. GIBBS: I would have to ask somebody that question.
Yes, sir.
Q Picking up on something Caren was -- Caren's question. You've been standing at this podium, you've been very diplomatic in talking about both/and, not either/or -- by the way, that's something my psychologist mother says all the time, so you're giving me bad dreams --
MR. GIBBS: I'm both diplomatic and analytical.
Q But, you know, the Europeans have not been nearly as diplomatic. I mean, Sarkozy -- President Sarkozy said today that "we consider that in Europe, we have already invested a lot for the recovery and that the problem is not about spending more, but putting into place a system of regulations so that the economic and financial catastrophe" -- blah, blah, blah. But anyway, the point is -- (laughter) -- he is not -- he is not doing --
MR. GIBBS: Blah, blah, blah. (Laughter.)
Q That was either/or -- that was not -- that was either/or, not both/and. And why do you think -- why --
MR. GIBBS: I don't -- well, I mean --
Q Why do you think the Europeans are being so up front?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I -- despite the opportunity to be analytical and psychological, I'm not going to try to speak exactly to the motivations of the French. But -- you know, Jonathan, in my continuing effort to be diplomatic, what I -- part of the quote that you read from President Sarkozy was an understanding that economic stimulus needed to take place in his country.
Again, there's a -- what some folks have said in terms of about a 2 percent change in GDP, that that's an appropriate amount of stimulus, and that's something the President looks forward to talking to European leaders about. But the President also not only agrees that there should be reinvestment for a recovery, but also that there has to be -- we have to take steps to ensure that the -- we have a regulatory framework for the 21st century that doesn't see this happening again.
I think the summit will also speak about what we can do through international institutions to ensure that emerging economies either in the developing world or in places like Eastern Europe don't suffer catastrophically from either a burdening of their financial systems or a great change in world demand for exports and trade.
I think there will be a lot of things on the docket that many people will agree on and that out of that we'll see and make progress towards a global economic recovery. I think the most important thing is that we all take steps together to ensure that we appropriately manage and deal with the current crisis, and take steps to ensure that it doesn't happen again.
Q But Republicans are now quoting the President of France -- (laughter) -- and the Chancellor of Germany --
MR. GIBBS: Irony of ironies. (Laughter.)
Q And they're trying to paint -- they're trying to paint President --
MR. GIBBS: While I was eating my Freedom Fries. (Laughter.)
Q They're trying to paint the President of the United States as to the left of Europeans. And --
MR. GIBBS: They've been doing that for six years, Jonathan, and the best I can tell my presence here might denote that that hasn't worked well.
Mark.
Q Robert, was President Obama disturbed to learn that Ban Ki-moon regards the U.S. as a "deadbeat nation" for being behind on its U.N. dues?
MR. GIBBS: Well, obviously the President and the Secretary General met, I believe Monday evening, in the Oval Office to discuss what they believe are mutual challenges throughout the globe, including problems in Darfur. I would note for the Secretary General that his word choice was unfortunate given the fact that the American taxpayer is the largest contributor to the United Nations.
Q Would you like a retraction or a withdrawal of that remark?
MR. GIBBS: I think given the contribution that the American taxpayer makes, I do think it's -- would be appropriate to acknowledge that role, and the President looks forward to working with the U.N. on mutual challenges.
Q Robert, the President has been taking pains to point out some positive signs in the economy where they exist. In that interview with regional press yesterday, he had a lot of interesting things to say. One of them was he said he was seeing signs, pockets in the country, where he was seeing housing prices stabilize. What regions was he talking about, and can the White House provide some data to substantiate?
MR. GIBBS: I'll certainly ask for -- and look for some of that. I think that -- I mean, I think if you look at some statistics today -- and obviously the President's interviews were yesterday, but we see today an upward revision in the retail sales figures for January that denote a glimmer of good news and that the February sales figures were stronger than expected.
But I think the President, both in those interviews and -- would now tell you that, as I've said many, many times, that we've got a long way to go and that we have many challenges to address and many things to do in order to take the necessary steps to put our economy back on that firm, solid, long-term footing.
Major.
Q Robert, a follow-up on Ed. What would trigger in the President's mind the need to move more National Guard forces toward the border? And when you talked about it a minute ago, you said the problems would not be solved through militarization. That's got a -- that's a phrase that has a lot of negative connotations around it. Is that what the President would regard -- I mean, that sounds like permanent and also --
MR. GIBBS: Let's not, let's not -- let me --
Q I just want to make sure I understand what the policy is.
MR. GIBBS: Let me do a better job of previously explaining what I meant -- and I thought I did this, but I'll do it just to ensure this. I think if you go back and read the President's answer, that he is probably in many ways answering in part a question slightly broader than what was simply asked about, given the current situation in Mexico and requests for additional troops. The President broadened it a bit by saying that all of the problems, and many of our long-term challenges around issues in the border, anything from what's going on right now, or what you see in terms of -- I mean, obviously, there was a debate about this a few years ago, that part of the immigration problem is solved through this -- that our long-term problems aren't going to be solved by -- and what I mean by militarization is simply moving the military to the border.
But the President obviously has concern for the news in Mexico, as I said yesterday, is appreciative of the Mexican President's efforts to take on the drug cartels. But also -- and obviously takes very seriously governors who have requested additional National Guard to be deployed there.
Obviously I can think of nobody better to help make such a determination than the former governor of Arizona, and now Department of Homeland Security Secretary.
Q On the omnibus, when the President was at a campaign rally in May last year, he said "We're not going to use signing statements as a way of doing an end-around the will of Congress." When the omnibus was signed yesterday, there was about two pages from the President articulating differences in policy, spending assignments from Congress -- some he said he would ignore gladly, some he would take as merely advice. What's the difference?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that what you saw the President enumerate yesterday in a statement was what Presidents for -- as I talked about earlier on Monday -- have used for a couple of hundred years. And that is to enumerate well-founded and well-documented constitutional objections to bills that have been established by many, many Presidents. To give you an example, I think part of the bill effectively tells the executive branch how to proceed in negotiations and discussions with foreign nations. I think it's a fairly well-held constitutional principle that the President, through the Constitution, is provided that authority.
On the other hand, there have been signing statements that have been used to make extravagant claims of unilateral executive power that are not well founded in constitutional theory. That's explicitly what you will not find President Obama doing, and I think what you did not find in yesterday's pronouncement.
Yes, sir.
Q There are reports that the U.S. Navy will be sending a destroyer to accompany the Impeccable back into the waters near China where the confrontation took place. Could you comment on those reports, confirm them? And what does this -- what does this say about the state of diplomacy around the issue right now?
MR. GIBBS: Well, in terms of specific ship movements, I would point you over to the Pentagon for some help on that. As I talked about yesterday, the Chinese Foreign Minister is -- met with Secretary Clinton yesterday, meets with National Security Advisor Jones today before meeting with President Obama and Vice President Biden in the Oval Office.
I expect that the events of earlier in the week will be on that agenda as well as others, and we'll have a readout for you at the conclusion of -- at the conclusion of that meeting.
Yes, sir.
Q Yes, Robert, can I come back to what you said about bubbles? And actually, sort of the way the President phrases it in the excerpts that you've given us.
MR. GIBBS: He's far more eloquent than I am, so if you're --
Q He phrased it rather interestingly, saying, "We cannot go back to endless cycles of bubble and bust." Does he think the business cycle can be repealed? I mean, I just -- you know, bubbles are one thing, but --
MR. GIBBS: Well, read me the phrase again.
Q "We cannot go back to endless cycles of bubbles and bust." Surely there are going to be ups and downs in an economy.
MR. GIBBS: Well, right. But again, there -- certainly there are ups and downs. There are ups and down in lots of facets of life. But are those ups and downs controlled by a sustained economic idea that creates jobs of the future, invests in the education in order to produce people to do those jobs of the future, take into account some fiscal restraint and fiscal responsible to ensure that government lending isn't crowding out private investment?
But the President will I think take on quite clearly that if -- you know, if -- he does not believe the theory of economic growth through an overheated housing market makes a whole lot of sense. I would posit to you that I've gotten God knows how many questions from up here about the danger of toxic assets that were leveraged by factors of 30 and 40 to 1, surrounding many of the mortgages that -- or some of the mortgages that were contained in an overheated and over-speculated housing market.
I don't think there's any doubt about that. Or whether we've seen through any number of statistics -- the President doesn't believe that economic growth is having six credit cards maxed out at $25,000 to $50,000; that that may produce in economic statistics great increases in retail sales or consumer spending, but I don't think any of us here would argue that that is a case for long-term sustained economic growth.
I don't think the President is -- I'm not even sure where one would go to repeal the business cycle.
Q It's not like they're going to outlaw irrational exuberance or investors making --
MR. GIBBS: No, I don't think it outlaws -- I mean, I don't think we're going to outlaw irrational exuberance. I do believe, though, the President believes that we must make tough choices now in order to put ourselves on a path that presents for the American people the opportunity to grow their economy not on something that will bust in three years, you know; not on something that will see stock prices go through the roof only to have stock prices collapse through the floor in a matter of months.
I mean, you know, let's -- the high point of the market recently was October of 2007, right -- 14,000 and some change. Exactly two months before, economists now believe what I think in the end might well be one of the biggest and deepest recessions in our country's history started. I think there's an -- I'm not an economist, but I'm pretty sure it all didn't go to pot in that November.
Margaret.
Q Thanks. I have an unexuberant question. It's been about a month since Tim Geithner announced the bank rescue plan; economists still waiting for a lot of the bulk of the details -- and understandably it's a complicated thing; a Wall Street Journal survey yesterday showing Geithner's support lower than Paulson's. What is going on? What do you attribute this to? Is this -- are these past problems of his prior to the confirmation affecting his credibility? Is this Wall Street looking for a scapegoat? Is this a crisis of leadership? What are you doing to turn it around? And why can't we see some of the details of the fix faster?
MR. GIBBS: Margaret, I will, when we conclude here, send you many of the details that Treasury has outlined regarding a financial stability plan.
Let me speak broadly. The administration is not here to win a popularity contest among economists that are interviewed by a newspaper. The President has great confidence in his economic team. I spoke a minute ago about some statistics -- I think we've seen -- though, you know, we've got a long way to go, I think if you step back and objectively look at what the administration and the Department of Treasury have been able to do in a very, very short period of time -- pass and begin to spend money for an economic recovery and reinvestment plan that we believe will save and create 3.5 million jobs and put money back into taxpayers' pockets; the introduction of a capital plan; the introduction of a plan -- the very first plan that helps responsible homeowners avoid foreclosure; a business and lending initiative that, when fully implemented, will increase credit available to businesses and families by a trillion dollars; and, you know, let's -- and the beginnings of health assessments for banks in order to understand exactly what is on their books and how best to solve their problems.
Let me go back to my market example. Last fall, what was the market reaction to the passage of the then-TARP plan? It went up a thousand points. Do you think at that point -- did you think at that point, based on the gyrations of the stock market, that our problems were solved?
Q But that was just a correction from the -- when it went down when Congress didn't pass it the first time. I mean, there was a --
MR. GIBBS: Did you think that was accurate, too?
Q No, I'm just saying, within two or three days there was this drop-down of --
MR. GIBBS: Well, no, it was actually in excess of several -- several hundred points from what had happened the previous --
Q -- 700 to 1,000, I grant you that. I'm not saying that's irrelevant.
MR. GIBBS: I will put that extra 300 points in my pocket and pull it out at some appropriate time for future question -- (laughter.)
Q I'm saying it's not zero to a thousand.
Q Rollover points.
MR. GIBBS: No, but I'm going to save those minutes -- (laughter) -- and call on them later on to -- let's understand that -- but my example is -- and my example there when the stock market reached 14,000 in October of 2007, exactly -- well, in some point, probably a month and a half before the recession began.
Q So perception is sometimes really wrong, or --
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think as the President has enumerated, that I'm not entirely sure that the perception of the up and downs of the market are necessarily the perceptions of where the economy is heading. It's precisely what the President will talk about this afternoon, that -- again, if you looked at the market in October of 2007, at 14,000 points, everything was grand. Yet two months later, somehow a series of economists -- I'm sure maybe some of those interviewed by the Wall Street Journal -- found that we were in a recession.
Again, I guess I would posit to you that I think the market can be a lagging economic indicator. I don't think the market always interprets what may or may not be happening in the short term and how it affects the long term.
Q Very quickly, in terms of a lot of the details of the bank plan that people are still waiting for, is there a way to expedite that, or is it taking a while for --
MR. GIBBS: Well, the way we expedite that is to do precisely what the Treasury is doing, and that is judge the health of many of those banks. It's a little bit like visiting the pharmacist before you go see the doctor, right? We believe it's important to go get a health assessment before you go get your prescription filled. And I think it's pretty safe to say that on at least a couple of instances, that might have happened in previously dealing with this crisis; that, again, there was -- you had a pot of money to solve the problem. But you didn't have an assessment for what banks were -- what was needed from banks and what was needed in order to have them continue to grow.
But again, I do think that it's important to go back and look and see what Treasury has done and this administration have done over a short period of time. I think by any reasonable estimation, you'll see that they've done quite a bit.
Yes, sir.
Q Robert, there's talk recently about a second economic stimulus package. I was watching Ari Fleischer on Hardball last night, and he said a lot of things, but one of them was that -- he floated this idea that -- the idea of a second stimulus package is somehow proof that the first one didn't work. Do you have any reaction to that? Or anything else --
MR. GIBBS: I will admit I have not seen -- I did not watch the interview. In terms of a second stimulus, I think precisely -- and you've heard our CEA chair say this exact thing -- it is hard to -- we have -- we're just in the beginnings of moving some of the money out for infrastructure projects. The money will soon be in paychecks, regarding tax cuts. Certainly believe this administration doesn't believe that there's any reasonable way to measure the success or failure of a piece of legislation that covers stimulus spending for -- through 2010 after a couple of weeks' time.
Again -- and I've said this repeatedly from here -- this administration is not focused on some hypothetical question about a second one, but instead how best do we implement the current one that we have in order to get people put back to work. I think that's what's important for this and what the administration is spending time on.
Q Would it be prudent for the Congress or administration to be working on a second stimulus, considering one of the key criticisms was that the first one was rushed by necessity? I mean, would it not be prudent to just start to be thinking about it just in case?
MR. GIBBS: No, I think the first one was rushed by the necessity of taking swift action, because hundreds of thousands and millions of people were losing their jobs, incomes were declining. The necessity was met based on the urgency of the problem. But I don't -- I don't want to buy into the premise that somehow the urgency -- because of that urgency, that it wasn't done in a way that -- going back to our many grading economic -- economists -- believed was the right thing to do.
Look, I'm not going to comment on --
Q But essentially, had you had all the time in the world, you would have --
MR. GIBBS: We do have all the time in the world, Savannah. (Laughter.)
Q Exactly my -- exactly my point.
MR. GIBBS: If we had all the time in the world, we'd be in Never-Never Land and I'd be flying. (Laughter.) So I don't think that all works.
So, I mean, it's a -- I must be in Jonathan's psychological mind -- I don't understand the -- it's a hypothetical that we had all the time in the world, that the President -- we -- Congress passed, the President signed, a $787 billion economic recovery plan that just began to spend money to get this economy going. What I was trying to say earlier was, let's give that some time to work. I think that is an appropriate thing. If other members on Capitol Hill want to plan for other things, you know, I'm certainly not going to limit their ability to do such a thing from this podium.
The President is focused on, and his team are focused on, and that's why the recovery -- those in charge of recoveries in each and -- many of the states are here today to talk about how to implement it. That's why you see the President stand up and say, it's important and incumbent upon all of you all to spend the money to get our economy moving again. That's the focus of the administration.
Peter.
Q We've seen some Democratic resistance to the President's budget -- revenue-raising aspects of it. How does he intend to overcome that? How will he try to build a coalition to pass this budget? And will he insist on this provision -- these provisions? Will he view this as his budget and ask Congress to yield to what he's proposing to do?
MR. GIBBS: No, I think, Peter, I think if you look at what the President's operating theory has been in dealing with Congress, it is, as we suggested earlier, soliciting their ideas, and we'd be anxious to see an alternative from those that find criticism with what the President proposed.
But what I -- what the President believes is important in what he proposed was addressing many of the problems that for so long had not been addressed; that we needed to take the necessary steps to make those investments.
And yes, we are -- contained in the budget and contained in all of the economic arguments that we have are going to be some very tough decisions about how to go forward with this. Those are certainly contained in the President's budget and -- but I think this is a process of give and take and we'll certainly see where it goes.
The President believes he has had some productive and positive meetings this week, and I assume that he'll continue to talk with Democrats and Republicans to get the budget through Congress in the next few weeks.
Christina.
Q What is the White House reaction to the FBI raid of this D.C. office of the chief technology officer, his new chief information officer? Has the President talked to him? Is he confident that he's not involved in this in any way?
MR. GIBBS: Well, Christina, I think as you know this is an ongoing investigation and questions about the investigation I would point you to -- point you to the Department of Justice, but that obviously it's a serious matter.
Q You don't have any concerns about the guy, though -- the one you appointed?
MR. GIBBS: Well, again, I would -- I would -- questions about the investigation I would --
Q I'm not asking about the investigation, I'm asking about the guy you appointed.
MR. GIBBS: And I would just point questions of the investigation to the Justice Department.
Q Robert, any change in the way how the White House is trying to look at their appointments and things because of this situation? I mean, you had a lot of people appointed --
MR. GIBBS: The answer is no.
Q General Motors says that it doesn't need $2 billion that it previously had wanted for March. Does that make the task force on autos job easier? And secondly, do you have an update on any decision-making related to auto suppliers, aid to auto suppliers?
MR. GIBBS: No, I don't have any updates. As I said I think yesterday, the task force was up in Detroit on Monday. The President was briefed on where they were last week. I don't know that he's received an update this week from the task force or whether that's been -- something like that has gone to him in a memo or not. But I think -- you touch on obviously an important point, that in many ways we can't forget auto suppliers and parts suppliers in the chain of auto production. That's obviously something that the task force is looking into.
In terms of what GM has announced today, I don't know whether that makes the current job that much easier, because obviously, though they don't need -- they've said now they don't need additional -- additional money for this month, we still have, as the President has said, have to come up with a long-term solution that retools and reimagines the auto industry so that it's sustainable for the long term. And I think that's the goal of the task force, and I think they're working toward that end quickly.
Q Bernie Madoff fooled the government and got away with his scheme for years. Do you think the current administration or the current structure would catch a Ponzi scheme like that?
MR. GIBBS: I think that the President made important appointments in the transition and in the early stages of this administration to ensure greater enforcement of regulations that are on the books. The President has throughout the campaign and into his tenure in the White House spoken that we must relook at that regulation and strengthen it for a 21st century financial system.
I think the situation today speaks to extraordinary irresponsibility and extraordinary greed, and that this administration, through its appointments and through its actions, will do all that it can to ensure strict enforcement, and the hope that through those actions, that kind of greed and irresponsibility and that kind of criminal activity never happens again.
Thank you.
Q Is the President glad that he pled guilty?
MR. GIBBS: Say again?
Q Is the President glad that he pled guilty?
MR. GIBBS: The President is glad that swift justice will happen.
END 
2:43 P.M. EDT
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/13/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________________________________________________ 
For Immediate Release                                 March 13, 2009
PRESS BRIEFING
BY 
PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:52 P.M. EDT
MR. GIBBS: Good afternoon. Are we clear? Now that Chuck is done, we'll start with a couple of announcements. And I'm going to go ahead and do the week ahead beforehand, just to -- you know, it's a fun Friday here, the 13th.
The President is pleased to announce the appointment of Ambassador Jeffrey Davidow as the White House Advisor for the Summit of the Americas. As President Obama said on February 10th, he will attend the Summit of the Americas to be held in Trinidad and Tobago on April 17th through the 19th. The President is looking forward to discussions with the leaders of the summit and to promoting a partnership based on mutual respect that would be beneficial to the people of the Americas.
In addition, the President made some phone calls today with some foreign leaders that we'll have a readout on in a little bit: King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, President Yudhoyono of Indonesia, and President Arroyo of the Philippines. So we'll have a little bit on that --
Q Not much.
MR. GIBBS: That's why the readout is coming soon. I was not in there for the calls.
Let me quickly do the week ahead. On Saturday, President Obama will meet with President Lula of Brazil, at the White House. They will discuss a number of things, including the upcoming G20 meeting and the Summit of the Americas, as well as issues such as the global financial crisis, the environment, and energy.
On Monday the President will be in Washington, have an event here at the White House, and then travel later to mark the anniversary of the V.A.
As you know, on Tuesday is St. Patrick's Day, so we will have officials from Ireland here for a St. Patrick's Day event, a well as travel to Capitol Hill for Speaker Pelosi's St. Patrick's Day Lunch.
On Wednesday afternoon, the President will travel to southern California and hold a town hall meeting in Santa Ana. He will then travel to Los Angeles, and will spend the night in L.A., holding a couple of events in Los Angeles on Thursday, before returning quite late that evening to Washington.
On next Friday, the President will be at the White House and then later in the afternoon the President and the First Family will travel to Camp David for the beginning of -- I believe the beginning of the girls' spring break.
Q What's the coverage for Saturday?
MR. GIBBS: I think we will do a pool spray on that, but we'll have something on that and we'll get you some information on radio address a little bit later on today.
So I assume Chuck is watching the ACC tournament -- (laughter) -- and fire away.
Q Not anymore. (Laughter.)
Q Chris Hill to Baghdad, there's some significant opposition from some Republicans, which could prevent you guys from getting 60 votes in the Senate for him. How serious do you think the problem is? And are you committed, no matter what, to standing behind him?
MR. GIBBS: Well, let's talk a little bit about Chris Hill. Obviously, he is a very seasoned, accomplished -- seasoned and accomplished diplomat, somebody who has dealt with extraordinary challenges, and is uniquely qualified in a very tough political environment that remains in Iraq, to seek an end to some of the political disputes that are vexing to the Shia, the Sunni, and the Kurds.
The President has extraordinary respect for his ability. I think he's proven his ability to understand very complex political situations, to resolve those political situations. Obviously, Iraq is a very unique situation, and the President believes that Chris Hill is uniquely qualified to meet those challenges. And I think that that will be true going forward, and the President is fully confident.
Q He does have a very lengthy background in, as you said, complex situations. But he doesn't have background in the Middle East, and that is the main reason for some of this opposition to his nomination.
MR. GIBBS: Well, again I would say that -- I mean, obviously, there are -- and the President has many people working on issues -- in order to resolve issues throughout the Middle East and the region. But I think the President believes quite strongly that the political disputes that stand in the way of continued progress in Iraq, many that have been outlined for years, call for somebody who has the unique ability to both understand and solve those challenges, and that we believe that Chris Hill possesses the skills to do exactly that.
Q Why didn't he go to bat for Charles Freeman, who had great experience in the Middle East? He stood mute on the whole controversy.
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think we talked about Mr. Freeman a couple of days ago. He's somebody who's served the country greatly, but asked that his nomination not proceed, and the Director of National Intelligence accepted --
Q Is it true that it's the Israeli lobby that killed --
MR. GIBBS: I don't have a whole lot to add. I think that -- I've watched with great interest how people perceive different things about our policy and during the campaign, about whether we were too close to one group or too close to the other. So I don't give a lot of thought to those --
Q Do you think it's their fault, the perception?
MR. GIBBS: I don't think a lot about it.
Q I don't ask you to think about it. I asked for straight answers.
MR. GIBBS: And I gave you as straight of one as I can get.
Q China's Premier said today that China is ready to expand its economic stimulus spending, but he also expressed concern about the safety of China's massive holdings of U.S. Treasuries. Does having China onboard for more economic stimulus give the administration any greater confidence in getting the Europeans in line behind that plan? And also, what, if anything, can the U.S. do to ease Chinese concerns about the safety of their investments in the U.S.?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the -- let me deal with the second part first. I think this President would say that he took office at a time of extraordinary economic crisis, and asked that we come together and pass into law a Recovery and Reinvestment Plan to stimulate and grow the economy, because the severe downturn that we would see would cause great job loss and great productivity loss. So money was certainly used, before that Recovery Act, to stimulate the economy.
I think the best thing we can do to assure anybody in Washington, America or throughout the world that we're serious is to pass the President's budget and put ourselves back on the path towards fiscal sustainability and fiscal responsibility. The President's budget will cut the deficit in half in four years, because the President understands that we cannot continue to do what we've been doing for years and years, and spending money that we don't have. Instead, we need to put ourselves back on that path in order to give everybody confidence that we're serious about not only dealing with those challenges but not wasting taxpayer money.
In terms of the first part, obviously the President is pleased that the Chinese are making a commitment to the same sort of recovery and reinvestment plan. Obviously it's an enormous economy.
The President has -- and I think we'll talk to leaders, other leaders in the G20, about continuing to observe what is happening to the world economy and to individual economies in the G20, and continually make those observations and see what best individual and collectively governments can do to stimulate the economy. That's certainly on the agenda for the President to discuss with the G20. Whether or not that spurs additional action in the short term is probably hard to say, but obviously a step in the right direction overall in seeing the decrease in demand met by a stimulus and a recovery plan that will hopefully fill that hole until the global economy starts working again.
Q The Chinese Premier did say that he wants -- the Chinese want the U.S. government to provide them some kind of guarantees on the safety of their investments. Obviously pulling out those investments could do some damage to the --
MR. GIBBS: There's no safer investment in the world than in the United States. And I think further reassurance would be for leaders here to demonstrate their commitment to spending money wisely and to stop borrowing more of it in the future by putting us on that path to fiscal sustainability through passage of the President's budget to cut the deficit in half.
Jake.
Q The White House has been critical in the last day or so of -- President Obama yesterday, and Larry Summers today -- of trends of bubble and bust, bubble and bust. When do you guys see this having started? Did this start with the dot.com bubble in the '90s?
MR. GIBBS: I think, obviously, the tech bubble would certainly be part of that -- would be part of that model. But I think if you look more recently, with both housing and credit cards, what you saw was statistical economic growth. You saw big growth in the stock market, but at the same time the broad number -- a broad swath of the American public, their incomes actually decreased for the very first time in history during a "economic expansion." That's why the President believes that it's important to make investments in health care, energy independence and education in order to provide a foundation to grow our economy long term in a stable -- with a stable foundation, in a way that doesn't depend on the boom and the bust.
Q Just as a quick follow-up, you guys have obviously started a campaign of trying to build more confidence in the economy and in the decisions that you guys have made. Can you just walk us through a little bit how this decision was made -- for the President's new language and Larry Summers' new language, talking about the economy and the investments you guys are making?
MR. GIBBS: I think it's important -- the President wanted to, as he I think has done in the beginning of his tenure here and certainly in the campaign, to explain to the American people the choices that we have and the decisions that are being made, where we've started, the challenges that we've gone through to get to the point we're at now, the very complicated and tough decisions that we have to make in order to create jobs, stabilize our financial system, prevent further erosion in the housing market and spread of the home foreclosure crisis.
Q Right, but only in the last days has he said things aren't as bad -- things weren't as good as we thought they were a few years ago, and they're not as bad now as we think they are -- you know, which is kind of a change in tone from when he was warning of an economic catastrophe if the stimulus bill didn't pass.
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think we've seen some glimmers of hope in terms, as I spoke yesterday, of retail sales. And I think Dr. Summers spoke of the notion that through the recovery we might see progress in terms of consumer spending -- the Recovery Act, I'm sorry. Look, as you note, the President is a -- is a very optimistic person by nature.
Q I don't think I noted that. (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: Well, I will note in your absence -- (laughter) -- that he's a very optimistic person. I think he would tell you that there are many situations that probably -- where things might not always be as bad as they seem or not as good as they may seem. But I think that's why he's decided to make tough decisions, and that's why the argument that he's made over the last few days and Dr. Summers made -- the importance of making these investments.
Many people have asked, you know, well, why are you dealing with health care and energy when you should be working on the economy? And I think the President, through this argument, can very clearly demonstrate for people how dealing with many of these problems, including getting us back on that path toward fiscal sustainability, are important not just in the short-term recovery, but laying that foundation for long-term growth.
Q Robert, just to kind of build on what Jake was just asking, Mr. Summers used language today when he was describing, you know, what businesses can do to help turn the economy around. He said that there are a large number of things on sale today, if you had sort of a long-term view. This is kind of similar to what we heard the President say last week about the stock market. So is there sort of this strategy to tell the American people that now might be the time to stop sitting on the sidelines, get back in the market, build that home that you need to build?
MR. GIBBS: I don't -- I'm going to say again, I don't think today's speech was designed to provide stock tips for the American people, but instead to demonstrate a road map forward that the administration and the economic team have developed to get our economy moving again.
The President believes that there -- as he said to Congress, through these tough decisions, we can see an outcome for brighter and stronger days for the country and for this economy that will create jobs, that will see long-term sustained economic growth that isn't predicated on an overheated, speculative housing market or families maxed out on multiple credit cards. I think that's what the President and Dr. Summers have most tried to convey in the past few days.
Obviously -- and again the numbers on consumer spending demonstrate some optimism and I think that it's important that the President, while setting forth the realistic challenges that we have, lay out for the American people the confidence he has in our ability to see the economy return to strength.
Q On those numbers, those consumer spending numbers, I think Mr. Summers also went on to say that, you know, there are some indicators that things are starting to stabilize. Is there -- when you view what the administration has been doing with the stimulus plan, is there that sense that things are starting to stabilize?
MR. GIBBS: Well, we're hopeful that the pillars are beginning to be put in place to stop the downturn, to turn the economy around, to create jobs, put more money back in people's pockets, and provide that long-term economic growth. Obviously, you know, whether the trajectory is now completely on the upside is hard to tell at this point, but I think we've -- we've taken some very concrete steps to get the economy in a position to do that.
Many more remain. You'll -- the President will, as he said earlier in the Oval Office, soon talk about ways to help small businesses get more access to the money that they need to do their work, continue to work on financial stabilization, and continue good work in trying to bring housing prices down and stabilize and reduce the number of home foreclosures.
I think all of that working together the President believes demonstrates a strong start -- you know, important to stress that we've unfurled no "Mission Accomplished" banners and I think any suggestion of that would be quite premature.
Yes.
Q Thank you, Robert. I know your office has provided numbers that show this administration is moving more quickly on most categories of nominations than previous administrations. But, still, Treasury is so important and we've seen at least four people withdraw their own names from top -- consideration from top positions. Why is it so difficult to get those top positions filled at Treasury? And is the vetting process tougher now than it used to be -- is that one of the big reasons?
MR. GIBBS: Well, you know, obviously we're always looking for qualified people to serve in government and to serve the American public. I'll refer again to many of those statistics that demonstrate that we're ahead of the game in filling critical positions, in making progress in ensuring that there are people working on the critical functions of government. We're always looking for additional people and have positions to fill at Treasury. But I think it's important to understand that what's been done in a few short weeks with the Treasury Department exceeds anything that might have been imagined just a few years ago.
Again, to go through the litany, again, of a recovery -- work on a recovery plan, work on a home foreclosure plan, work on a business and lending initiative -- you'll again see progress on loans specifically designed for small businesses, a financial stability plan -- many of the things that we need to address the shortcomings in our economy. We're making progress on that. And we've got a good team, and obviously looking to add more.
In terms of the rigor of the process -- I mean, obviously there's a process that all nominees have to go through, but we feel like we're making strong progress.
Q One particular element of the vetting process is stocks and bonuses. Are your rules tougher on requiring people to give up stock holdings and bonuses? And could that be part of the problem with Treasury?
MR. GIBBS: That's a question I honestly don't know the answer to. But I can certainly -- we can certainly check on that.
Chuck.
Q Are you satisfied with the speed with which the Finance Committee is handling these nominees?
MR. GIBBS: Yes, I think we're working well with them in order to get the people that we need in these jobs. Again --
Q Would you like to see it be done faster?
MR. GIBBS: Well, the President would like to have walked in on January 20th with a government completely filled. That hasn't happened for any of his predecessors, so I don't think he was under the illusion that it would happen with him.
But again -- I know I keep coming back to this, but let's look at what has been able -- what the Treasury Department and what the economic team, with which the Treasury Department is obviously a huge component, has been able to accomplish for the American people in a little over seven weeks' time.
Q Mr. Volcker was a vocal critic -- he's been a vocal critic about the fact that it --
MR. GIBBS: I understand.
Q Did he bring this up today?
MR. GIBBS: I don't know if he talked to the President about that today. I think one thing you also -- Mr. Volcker would also reiterate what I've just told you -- that whether it's financial stability, home foreclosure, recovery and reinvestment, creating jobs, putting money into taxpayers' pockets -- all of those things the Treasury Department has been focused on over the past seven weeks of this administration. And I think what they've accomplished in such a short period of time exceeds what's been done to this financial system in terms of ensuring that we manage this crisis and that this crisis never happens again. I think the American people can be quite proud of what's been done on it in a very short period of time.
Q And to follow-up on Jennifer's question, the criticisms that Senator McCain and Senator Graham, in particular, have been the highest profile against Christopher Hill -- do they have merit?
MR. GIBBS: No, I liked my answer to Jennifer's question.
Q So it doesn't have merit, their criticisms?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the criticism is answered by the very qualifications that -- that Chris Hill brings to the job. Everyone is entitled to their opinion and I certainly wouldn't say that -- I'm not going to judge their critique.
I would simply ask that all members judge the qualifications of somebody as accomplished and seasoned a diplomat as Chris Hill is, understanding the situations that -- the complex situations that he's been put in and the progress he's made in those, is exactly the type of person one would want dealing with the very vexing political problems that stand in the way of the continued stabilization and security of Iraq, between the Shia, the Sunni, and the Kurd. And I think the President believes he's got the right man for the job.
Laura.
Q This morning Larry Summers said that "no substantially interconnected institution or market on which the system depends should be free from rigorous public scrutiny." I'm wondering if you could help out with understanding exactly what he meant by that, what he means by "no substantially interconnected institution or market on which the" --
MR. GIBBS: I will -- you'll be surprised to know that I've not yet finished my Ph.D work in economics --
Q Well, his speech was meant for people who don't have Ph.Ds in economics.
MR. GIBBS: Maybe not in that particular section. (Laughter.)
Q Well, one interpretation of that is that he was referring to hedge funds, that hedge funds who -- that currently are not subject to --
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me do this. I will ask them specifically what -- look, I -- without --
Q I mean, I think he's trying to ask what --
MR. GIBBS: No, no, I -- completely. I think it's fair to tell you I don't have a Ph.D in economics. But I think the -- and I'll see if there's a specific financial instrument that he's talking about. I do believe that what one of the things that he's alluding to is, through this notion of transparency, is -- and sort of the larger regulatory framework that has to be updated, I think we all understand that you certainly don't need a Ph.D in economics to understand that. The regulatory framework that we've had policing some of the decisions that have been made relating to the economy have not kept up with what has to happen to have a strong regulatory system and then to ensure that we don't find ourselves either over-leveraged or making decisions for a few that will affect the many.
Obviously on the agenda of G20 will be a continued discussion about how to update that regulatory framework. And underneath that there are obviously a number of different steps that can and must be taken in order to ensure that that framework provides all of us in this economy with the confidence and the protection that decisions are being watched and made in a way that are consistent with our values, and that we don't find our economy suffering from the types of problems that it does now.
Q The other sort of nebulous piece -- this was the back half of that comment where he said -- (laughter) -- there are two nebulous pieces and just one --
MR. GIBBS: Right.
Q -- free from rigorous public scrutiny, which is -- it seems like another way of talking about transparency, and the need for transparency, as opposed perhaps to actual regulation. And I'm wondering if that was the message.
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me -- let put in -- put that through the English meter and we'll spit something out.
Connie.
Q Thank you, Robert. It's a serious question and it's an easier one. I don't know if you or the President saw the Jon Stewart piece last night with Cramer, but it was serious journalism. Does the White House believe that this is the obligation of journalists to call out lies, to warn the public that there are dangers ahead?
MR. GIBBS: I don't -- the President and I talked earlier in the day yesterday about watching it. I forgot to email and remind him that it was on, so I don't know if he's seen it. I enjoyed it thoroughly -- (laughter) -- despite, even as Mr. Stewart said, that it may have been uncomfortable to conduct and uncomfortable to watch. I thought it was -- I thought somebody asked a lot of tough questions, and I am not surprised that the video of Mr. Cramer's appearance doesn't appear on CNBC's web site today.
Ed.
Q Robert, there was a piece this morning about the fact that same-sex spouses of federal employees are barred from health care coverage because -- by the Defense of Marriage Act. Since the President would like to see a legislative repeal of that law, what is he prepared to do about it?
MR. GIBBS: Well, obviously I saw the story, and the President's position remains the same. The President would work with Congress in order to -- not just on this but on other ideas -- institute what he promised he'd do in the campaign.
I don't have a specific update on where the legislation is.
Major.
Q Robert, a couple things the President said yesterday at the Business Roundtable I'd like to go over with you. He said --
MR. GIBBS: Hopefully not at quite the economic level that --
Q No, since the President said it, it's probably maybe a little bit easier --
MR. GIBBS: He went to law school at Harvard, so I don't -- go ahead.
Q He said, "Potentially lowering corporate rates in exchange for closing a lot of the loopholes that make the tax system so complex, that's a very appealing conversation to me --I'd like to pursue it." How rapidly would the President like to pursue, and does he see there any need to lower corporate tax rates in this current economic downturn?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that -- I think the comment that the President made regarding tax reform is an idea that he's expressed before. There's obviously a growing complexity with the tax code that enables a number of shelters and loopholes. And I think he would certainly be encouraged to work with business and others to see what common interest was able to be had to get rid of some of those loopholes and some of those shelters in order for a lower tax rate or less complexity, certainly, on the American people as we get closer to the 15th of April to fill out income tax returns.
Q During the campaign, he often talked about the loophole aspect of it. Rarely do I remember him linking it with lower corporate tax rates. And I'm just wondering if that's a new, sort of, grand bargain on taxes he's now pursuing or more open to pursuing.
MR. GIBBS: Well, he's certainly open to pursuing it. I've heard him say that before. This room has mentioned we've got a lot on our plate. But obviously I think the President, as you saw throughout his answers yesterday, is interested in working with business on many common issues that they share, whether it's the rising cost of health care, ensuring that our children are educated for the 21st century jobs that we believe many of these businesses will be creating, as well as simplifying the tax code and lowering the tax rate.
I do think the President believes that if we do that hand in hand, that there's a possibility for reform.
Q The second thing the President said is, "We don't anticipate that every piece of health care is done this year." What did he mean by that, and what parts do you think may not be done this year, and how would that fit within his very strong calls at the health care reform summit to get health care done "this year"?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I mean, obviously -- and this goes to some of the aspects of the budget, are not going to be -- you know, we'll pass a -- we're hopeful to pass a budget this year, but not all of what is contained in the budget goes into effect this year.
Q So it's a timing, not a policy thing, he's referring to?
MR. GIBBS: Yes.
Q The policy goal of health care --
MR. GIBBS: The policy goal is to finish health care reform, understanding that it might take some time in order to phase in different aspects of that reform, just as, you know, changing the tax rates back to the prosperous '90s isn't going to happen -- won't happen when the budget is passed, it's --
Q He's not conceding any policy ground? This is all about timing and implementation?
MR. GIBBS: Yes.
Yes, sir.
Q Robert, is the White House lowering its sights a little bit on coming out of the G20 with that 2 percent stimulus from especially European countries? You sound like you were kind of softening expectations a moment ago.
MR. GIBBS: No, no, I think what -- I think it's consistent with what I said yesterday, that the President and the economic team believe that it's important that we monitor what will and has been done by different countries in order to make up for the projected downturn in GDP and how that affects the global economy.
But as I said yesterday, the President and his team don't go to Europe looking for everyone to sign on the dotted line and accept a certain percentage, but to evaluate continually what is suggested, what is being done, and to ensure that as our economies change, that we're continuing to evaluate whether additional steps -- if the 2 percent in some countries haven't been made, can be looked at.
So I think it's -- I think the President looks forward to working with countries in the G20 to ensure that we're making progress and continually evaluating what has to happen to address the economic challenges.
Peter.
Q Robert, following up on an earlier question, there are some veterans of past Democratic administrations who believe that the President is simply overloading the political circuitry in pursuing an agenda as multi-pronged as he is. Is there not an argument for just pushing on one issue, given the White House's limited time and resources -- say, economic recovery -- letting other -- leaving other issues for later in the term?
MR. GIBBS: Well, you know, Peter, as I've said here multiple times, I think that -- a couple of different things. One, these challenges -- many of these challenges are interconnected, right. We talked a little bit about the deficit -- and I said this a few days ago -- if you're concerned about the deficit and the debt that we are potentially passing on to our children, the amount of money that we spend on Medicare and Medicaid and the tremendous growth that we see in the cost of health care each year is a particular driver of the deficit and the debt.
So to assume that you can look at one without understanding that it affects the other, that's exactly the decision that has been made in the past to simply kick many of these problems down the road and hope that you can address part of it but not all of it and see continued progress and growth. The President in this case simply doesn't believe that's true. The same I think is true for energy independence. You know, when gas is -- when gas is $3 -- $2 or $3 or $4 -- and when I say $2 I mean, you know, 10 years ago when it hit $2 everybody called for important steps for energy independence; that we've had Presidents, dating back to I think Nixon, mention that we're dependent upon foreign oil and have to take steps to lessen our economies dependence on that oil in order to not be trapped when it comes to economic growth.
Every President since Nixon has made those claims. But we haven't taken concrete steps, as our dependence on foreign oil has actually only increased since President Nixon said that.
The President and this country face a number of challenges. And I think, as he said yesterday, it would certainly be convenient to only have to deal with one thing. Regrettably, there are enough challenges that face the American people and our future economic growth, that it demands focusing on all of them at the same time.
Steve.
Q Robert, assuming that your fine staff could handle all these many major proposals at the same time, what makes you think Congress could handle it? Just this week, they just turned in the appropriations -- the omnibus thing -- six months after the fiscal year started, then took a long weekend off.
MR. GIBBS: I'm jealous. (Laughter.) Because I think that -- to borrow some of what I said to Peter -- I think there -- these are not -- the times that we face are unusually uncommon, that the challenges that we have -- let's take it -- for instance health care. In the intervening sort of 15 or 16 years since health care was -- the last real major reform of health care was attempted, the problem has only gotten worse. More people are paying more for less health care than ever before. It's crushing businesses. It's crushing families. It's crushing state budgets. Our dependence on foreign oil has increased. All of these problems have only gotten worse, and if we don't deal with them now, they're only going to get worse in four years. The President isn't interested in turning over the challenges that he faces to the next administration or the next President, without trying to address them.
Q But what's changed in Congress, the committee structure, the fact that all this still has to work through the same system in Congress. What makes you think you can still get more than one thing through at a time when it's been hard to get one thing through at a time?
MR. GIBBS: An energetic President.
Lynne.
Q One of the other things that Larry Summers said that I thought was pretty interesting, he --
Q Uh-oh. (Laughter.)
Q -- when he talked about --
MR. GIBBS: Uh oh. (Laughter.) No, sorry, I was --
Q Were you making a face or what?
MR. GIBBS: No, no, no, I just -- somebody at my alma mater is going to take my minor in economics away from me.
Q Was this basketball?
MR. GIBBS: No, no, no, go ahead.
Q Which is -- by the way, when is the bracket coming out? This isn't my question, but when is the President's bracket going to come out?
MR. GIBBS: We will, in a transparent White House -- (laughter) -- release the President's bracket next week.
Q Next week. Okay, now, so my question is, one of the things that Larry Summers did talk about in his speech today is how greed gives way to fear, and this fear begets fear, and that's the paradox at the heart of this crisis. But I don't know if he meant this more as a macro. Why wouldn't a prudent person be acting, you know, with fear? Because things might turn around, but they haven't yet.
And I know that Summers also said that every crisis eventually ends. It's just if you're an individual, you don't know when.
MR. GIBBS: Right. Well, and I think -- look, I think for individuals in this country, nobody would be surprised at all of the concern that millions face -- or millions have about the challenges that we face in the economy that we have.
We'd hope that they become more confident as the administration, as the President talked about, puts in place the pillars that are needed to turn our economy around, that we addressed those short-term challenges and long-term problems.
But I think also what Dr. Summers was talking about is the tremendous amount of entrepreneurship and innovation that this country has always seen; that because that we've seen a, quite frankly, very damaged financial system, that we've seen growth deteriorate so, that we've seen such job loss, that through entrepreneurship and innovation, we have the potential to see the economy grow, and grow in a strong way in the future; that in order to move past that bubble to bubble, the American people need to understand that they can have confidence and that brighter days are ahead in order to get past that to sustain long-term economic growth. I think that's what Dr. Summers and that's what the President have talked about over the past few days.
Obviously, the statistics that we see and the stories that the President reads demonstrate that we have a long way to go. But the President is confident that we're taking the steps that we need to turn the economy around.
Q Robert.
MR. GIBBS: April.
Q Thank you. Piggy-backing on Lynne's question and somewhat on the economic situation, Geithner said there's an excess of fear; the President agreed there is incredible pain and hardship out there. But yesterday at the Business Roundtable he said things are never as bad as they seem and never as good as they are. Now, could you tell me exactly where the needle lies on the spectrum, because we're hearing things are going to get better, you know, they're not as bad. I mean, where is the needle right now?
MR. GIBBS: Somewhere between "not as bad as they could be" and "not as good as they need to be."
Q But, you know -- okay, as you were saying --
MR. GIBBS: I don't have a special instrument with said needle, April. (Laughter.)
Q I understand, but I mean, you work in these --
MR. GIBBS: It's 7.5. (Laughter.) It's at 7, it's 7.
Q Okay, all right. Now, I'm --
MR. GIBBS: Help me give you an answer to your question.
Q I'm trying to help you. The reason why I'm asking that is because, you know, you still have some economists out there saying the needle is lying between recession and depression. And the President tried to have this tone of optimism, but yet saying that there is incredible pain. And people really want to know where -- you know, you keep saying it might get worse before it gets better --
MR. GIBBS: Sure.
Q -- but how much worse? Where are we right now?
MR. GIBBS: Well, let's understand -- well, where we are right now is we saw revised growth estimates in the fourth quarter, far greater than most predicted. What the President believes his job is in discussing the economy is to be very honest with the American people about where we are. But also he believes that the administration is taking steps to instill the confidence that Americans need, to put in place the pillars for continued -- or renewed economic growth.
And I think the President -- the President wouldn't just give you one of those; the President would give you both of those. The President would give the American people both a realistic assessment of where we are as well as the path for where we have to go in order to see that growth. But I don't think the President would give you one without the other.
Q But beyond hope and optimism, there's reality, and is 7.5 the reality -- out of 10 --
MR. GIBBS: Let me -- hold on, I've got to look at my gizmo.
Again, I think the exact example that you just -- minus the 7.5 -- the exact example you just gave me is exactly the way the President frames things. We are living in the here and now reality of many challenges economically. The President also believes that this administration and Congress are taking steps to address where we are and get us on a path to where we need to go. Again, I think the President has been very -- very forthright with this because he believes that in order to -- in order to be believed about where we are economically, we have to be honest about where we are. I don't think the President would stand up in front of you, or a group of Americans, and say things are great. I don't think they would have a lot of confidence that they were listening to somebody who truly understood exactly where we are.
So when he explains our economic problems, he'll do it in a very realistic way. But the President is also confident and hopeful that the steps that we're taking will move us down that path. Again, I think you have to do both, and certainly the President believes that.
Yes.
Q A quick follow-up to that. Does the President still believe that things could get worse before they get better?
MR. GIBBS: Well, sure. Well -- 7.8. (Laughter.)
Q On the --
MR. GIBBS: Seven point eight. (Laughter.)
Q But it's true.
MR. GIBBS: I understand. But I mean, look, there's -- are there -- is there reason to be hopeful? Yes. I don't think if you -- in October of 2007, when the stock market was at 14,000, did people think that two months from then there would be the beginning of an economic recession? I don't know.
But what's important -- whether things get a little bit worse or a little bit better, the President is taking steps to put us on a path towards job creation, economic growth, income growth -- and more importantly, to address the long-term challenges that we've faced for so long, that have been ignored administration after administration, in order to ensure that long-term we have that foundation -- not for bubble-to-bubble economic growth, but sustained, solid, long-term economic growth.
See you guys tomorrow -- or next week. Tomorrow -- yikes. See you tomorrow -- ha. No. (Laughter.)
END 
2:40 P.M. EDT
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/16/09
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
__________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                              March 16, 2009

PRESS BRIEFING
BY
PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
2:54 P.M. EDT

MR. GIBBS:  Let me just make one quick announcement before we get started with questions.

Today, Mexico announced its intent to take retaliatory actions against a range of U.S. exports.  This is in response to the termination of a cross-border, long-distance trucking demonstration project that allowed a small number of Mexican trucks to enter the United States beyond -- beyond the border commercial zones, and provided reciprocal access to U.S. companies in Mexico.  The 2009 omnibus appropriations bill terminated the project.  Congress has opposed the project in the past because of concerns about the process that led to the program's establishment and its operation.

The administration recognizes these concerns.  The President has tasked the Department of Transportation to work with the U.S. Trade Representative and the Department of State, along with leaders in Congress and Mexican officials, to propose legislation creating a new trucking project that will meet the legitimate concerns of Congress and our NAFTA commitments.  Senator Dorgan, the sponsor of the amendment that ended the program, has written to us to express his willingness to work with the administration in good faith to address this issue.

So with that, let me take some questions.  Yes, ma'am.

Q    A couple on AIG.  The President said he wanted Treasury Secretary Geithner to look at a legal way to stop these bonuses, but it seems to be the conclusion of the company and the administration that there really isn't a way to stop the bonuses that are required by contracts.  So do you guys have any sense of what you can do?  And a broader follow-up.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, obviously the President has asked the Secretary of Treasury to go back and reexamine any possible way to ensure that the bonuses that the President described as being outrageous and excessive, to see if there's a way to block those.  Obviously Treasury also possesses ways in which it can make the taxpayers whole, based on its commitment in finalizing the $30 billion that was committed to the company I think within the past two weeks, in looking to add provisions to that, that address the excessive retention bonuses that Treasury finds unacceptable.

Q    So you don't know of a way yet that you can --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, that's what the President has tasked members of the administration with examining.

Q    And all this talk yesterday on the shows and then today by the President himself, is -- should this be construed as some sort of public pressure on the company or the bonus recipients to say they wouldn't accept the bonuses, for example?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, obviously I think -- I mean, I think you've heard the President now a number of times both addressing excessive compensation for CEOs, having Treasury outline rules going forward as to how to deal with some of that excessive compensation.  You've seen the President address the way taxpayer money is spent, TARP money is spent on travel and extravagance related to that.  I think that is -- this is certainly part of that.

Obviously, I think the President in his remarks spoke to this, that this isn't just outrageous and doesn't just sort of violate your sense of commonsense, but it offends our values.  Certainly, any person that is subject to these bonuses would have -- would have to and should think long and hard about whether, given the performance of the company, this is either warranted or appropriate.

Q    That sounds like a yes.

MR. GIBBS:  It's a long way of saying that, yes.

Q    Robert, a follow-up on AIG, would -- as you're looking at ways to claw back those bonuses, is there a legislative option that the White House might seek?  And secondly, I was struck by the fact that the President called out CEO Liddy as being -- as coming after those contracts have been established.  Was that a way of voicing support for him?  Does the President want to see CEO Liddy stay?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I haven't talked directly to him about CEO Liddy.  Obviously, I think it's important to understand that in the course of events, these are contracts that were negotiated, as I understand it, in April of 2008.  Obviously, help for AIG came even outside of regulations governing TARP, because this was help that came prior to the legal existence of or creation of TARP.

So look, a lot of people are dealing with situations that they inherited.  I think what the President spoke firmly and clearly about is the sense that as, you know, hundreds of millions of Americans are dealing with these tough economic times, that this is just another example of an activity that, as I said, offends our common sense, offends our sense of value, and seems completely misplaced, given what all that we're dealing with.

Q    There were two questions --

MR. GIBBS:  In terms of the legislation, again, I think the administration has -- the President has asked the administration to look into this.  I don't know the answer to a legislative remedy, going backwards.  But we can certainly look into that.  Again, I -- you know, I think the important thing is the President has asked the Secretary to take steps to look into this and other options.

Jake.

Q    Did you guys first find out about these bonuses last week?

MR. GIBBS:  I think that's true, based on what I read in the newspaper.

Q    But you gave money to AIG two or three weeks ago.  How could you not know that they have these millions, hundreds of millions of dollars --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, Jake, there's -- according to news reports, there's existing contracts, some of which the President -- of which the President has asked the Secretary to examine, going forward.  I think you also heard the President speak today about having a resolution authority that gives the government and taxpayers far more flexibility in dealing with the disposition of AIG in a way that gives taxpayers protection and flexibility; a disposition that we don't currently have, but steps that we would like to see taken in order to deal with AIG as a whole.

Q    But why didn't you attach it to the $30 billion you gave a couple weeks ago?

MR. GIBBS:  Again, Jake, the --

Q    You're looking to retroactively attach it to this new $30 billion.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, they're looking through contracts to see what can be done to wrest these bonuses from their recipients.

Q    No, I'm sorry, I don't think -- I don't understand, so maybe I'm just not understanding.  But President Obama said in early February when he gave the speech on executive compensation, "These kinds of compensation packages in the midst of this economic crisis isn't just bad taste, it's bad strategy, and I will not tolerate it as President.  We're going to be demanding some restraint in exchange for federal aid."  Since that time, he gave tens of billions of dollars in federal aid to AIG without demanding restraint.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, Jake, we've got existing relationships, contracts, as I just mentioned, that were negotiated a year ago, assistance that was granted outside of the legal authority prior to the creation of the Troubled Asset Relief Program.  The President has asked the administration to go back and look at what remedies are possible to block those bonuses.

Q    Well, why didn't he do that before?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, the excessive compensation rules that you noted -- and I think somebody asked this at the background briefing that we had -- obviously are prospective based on some limitations that we have in looking backwards.  The President has asked Secretary Geithner and members of the administration to exhaust all legal remedies in looking backwards to see what steps could be taken to block these bonuses.

Q    I know, but since -- and I'm sorry to belabor this point -- but since President Obama gave his speech, you guys gave more money to AIG.  Why wasn't it attached to the new money?

MR. GIBBS:  Because it's -- again, it's part of the --

Q    Part of the old contract.

MR. GIBBS:  Right.  It's part of --

Q    But you're looking now retroactively to see if you can attach something to that old money?

MR. GIBBS:  That's what we're looking at.

Q    Well, why didn't you do it at the time, if you're looking to retroactively do it?

MR. GIBBS:  The administration is taking the steps today to go back and see what can be done, as Jeff said, to call those bonuses back.

Q    But, Robert, to follow up on Jake's point, did Secretary Geithner make a mistake by not reviewing these contracts -- they're a year old -- before he cut a new check to AIG?  Why didn't he do that?

MR. GIBBS:  I would certainly ask the Treasury -- I'll ask the Treasury that.  But again, to some degree, there are legal instruments and contracts that predate this administration, that predate the legal founding of the TARP program.  The President has asked this administration to exhaust all legal avenues to see what can and should be done going backwards.

Q    When the President gave that speech -- on January 29th, I think it is -- about excessive compensation, the next day you came in here and said, "I think you will see the President and his economic team outline a plan to deal with what he found irresponsible yesterday."  Where's that plan?  Because it's now been about six weeks and you're acknowledging in Jennifer's question there's not really that much you can do legally, it appears.  So why in January did the President and you tell the American people we're going to stop --

MR. GIBBS:  Okay, let's be fair, Ed.  Let's be fair, because --

Q    You said you were going to stop --

MR. GIBBS:  Hold on, hold on, let me answer your question before you ask another one.  I think if you go back and look at the background briefing that we did here -- I'll be happy to provide you the transcript -- it was specifically -- there was a specific question about moving forward on executive compensation.  Look, Ed, we deal with things every day that are not of our own making, that we have, for whatever reason, fallen onto our plate and been given the amazing responsibility of dealing with.  Some of that are contractual obligations and responsibilities that we found when they gave us the key to the front door.

Our job is to do all that we can to protect the taxpayers going backwards and, as I've said and as the President said and as each economic member -- team member has said, to change the rules of the road going forward.  That's why we changed the rules of the road in how money could be spent in an economic recovery package.  We changed the rules of the road in addressing home foreclosure crisis by for the very first time giving help to those that had played by the rules.

We will change the rules of the road going forward as it relates to financial regulation to ensure that this type of activity doesn't happen again.

We can't change everything in the past.  We will do all that we can -- the President has asked the administration to look and see what possible remedies there are.  But we're also focused on ensuring that the actions we take are consistent with changing the way we do business here in Washington.

Q    If I could follow up, former Vice President Cheney was on "State of the Union" yesterday -- and a lot of criticism of this White House.  To boil it down, on national security, he said the President's policies are making the country less safe.  And on the economy, he was charging that the President is taking advantage of the financial crisis to vastly expand the government in all kinds of ways -- health, education, energy.  How do you respond to those kinds of allegations from the former Vice President?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I guess Rush Limbaugh was busy -- (laughter) -- so they trotted out the next most popular member of the Republican cabal.  (Laughter.)

I would say that the President has made quite clear that keeping the American people safe and secure is the job -- is the most serious job that he has each and every day.  I think the President saw over the past seven-plus years the delay in bringing the very people to justice that committed terrorist acts on this soil and on foreign soil; that that delay in seeking swift and certain justice was what he decided to change through his executive order in changing the legal architecture by which these terrorists would finally be brought to justice.

I think the American people will in this administration see those actors brought to the swift and certain justice that was not brought to them in the previous administration.

Q    On the economy, you're trying to take advantage of this crisis?

MR. GIBBS:  I think there are -- I think not taking economic advice from Dick Cheney would be maybe the best possible outcome of yesterday's interview.

Q    And has the President read the Red Cross report on terrorism, and does his ban on torture -- I mean, on torture -- does his ban on torture apply also to Bagram and Abu Ghraib and anything outside of Guantanamo?

MR. GIBBS:  I will -- I should ask those guys specifically about your second question.  I have not talked to him about the Red Cross report.  Obviously, Helen, as you know, the President -- as I just said to Ed, the President took steps, the very earliest of his administration, to examine and change the rules regarding detainees in this administration and to ban torture.  And I think he's seen what that -- the extent that that policy affected our standing in the world, and took strong action to change it.

Chip.

Q    Yesterday, Director Summers seemed to suggest that there wasn't much you could do about the AIG bonuses, and said we don't abrogate contracts willy-nilly, and just -- and that was it, and then moved on.  And then today, you have this request from the President --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, now, let's be fair to -- let's be fair to --

Q    Well, it sounds like a pretty big change.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's be fair to -- I know this was on a different network, but let's be --

Q    No, it was on ours, actually.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, maybe he was better on the other network.  (Laughter.)

Q    No, no.

MR. GIBBS:  You know, but let's be -- let's be fair in -- let's be fair and let's be fair in the global sense of what Director Summers said, and that was that he said that in witnessing -- and I think this was followed up largely by what Chairman Bernanke said on a fine program on CBS last evening -- (laughter) -- that in 18 months of what had happened over the course of the last 18 months economically, that some of the most outrageous -- the most outrageous thing happened as a course of AIG, and he found that the bonuses that were reported in papers yesterday to be outrageous.

So certainly ask me your question, but I just -- let's be -- let's be fair to what Dr. Summers said in categorizing these bonuses, not simply saying something and moving on.

Q    Well, he certainly -- he certainly said they were outrageous, but I think he pretty -- made pretty clear that there wasn't much that could be done about it.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, that's --

Q    Now things seem to have changed.  What changed between then and now, with the President now coming out and saying that we really need to look --

MR. GIBBS:  The President asked -- specifically asked his economic team to go back again and determine whether there was any legal avenue with which to block these bonuses, that there was anything possible that could be done to change what had happened.

Q    And could I ask you, when you referred to the former Vice President, that was a really hard-hitting, kind of a sarcastic response you had.  This is a former Vice President of the United States.  Is that -- is that the attitude?  Is that the sanctioned tone for the former Vice President of the United States, from this White House?

MR. GIBBS:  Sometimes I ask for forgiveness rather than for permission, Chip.  But no, I hope my sarcasm didn't mask the seriousness of the answer with which I addressed to Ed -- that for seven-plus years the very perpetrators that the Vice President says he's concerned about weren't brought to justice.

The President, on the very first week of his administration, chose to change that, to take these that had committed terrorist acts and to finally bring about the -- instituting a process to bring about swift and certain justice, not something that was done under the previous tenure, but something that this President believes will happen under his watch.

Chuck.

Q    Robert, first thing, to just follow up on Chip's first question, which is, we're now at about 36 hours since the public found out about the -- about these AIG bonuses.  You know how this town works.  If nobody has an idea yet, there's not even a bill in Congress that somebody has come up, isn't it likely that you guys will probably run through all the legal --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let -- I don't --

Q    -- if there's nothing to be -- that at this point, it's looking less likely you can do anything legal

MR. GIBBS:  I'm not a contract lawyer.  I don't know the specific answer to that question, but that's what the President has asked appropriately educated contract lawyers to do.

Q    Now on a bigger picture, how do you hold -- how do you keep the public's trust on this issue?  You talked about changing the rules of the road -- you said it a number of times in these questions -- when some of the people that wrote some of these rules or advocated for some of these rules changes at AIG -- for instance, Dr. Summers, who was then Secretary Summers, was on Capitol Hill in 2000, calling for this new derivatives market, which is one of the things that helped weigh down AIG; that the people involved -- that this idea that you have the CEO of Goldman Sachs being invited by Secretary Geithner to help out, trying to figure out the AIG -- but it's this perception that it's -- all of Washington and Wall Street are in this together, trying to figure this out.   I mean, do you worry about this credibility problem?

MR. GIBBS:   I think I would disagree largely with the premise of your question, and I don't think it would be fair to members of a previous administration, like Dr. Summers, to tell you that he permitted a hedge fund to be --

Q    Not that he, personally, permitted, but he was --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, but -- well, hold --

Q    -- he was an advocate for the law change, which a lot of companies took advantage of, including AIG.

MR. GIBBS:  Right, but I'd -- look, whether or not anybody in their wildest dreams could have imagined a hedge fund attached to the top of a giant life insurance or insurance company, making a series -- a series of completely bad decisions -- whether anybody could have imagined that, I don't know the answer to.

I do know the answer going forward is that everybody works for the President of the United States, who is committed to ensuring that those rules do change.  We are moving forward on a much stronger financial regulatory reform to ensure that many of the things that you've seen over the past many months don't happen again.  Obviously, that's important not just for this country but to give confidence throughout the world; that will be a big topic, going forward, in G20.

I do think the President shares the public's outrage on this.  That's why he's taken steps to change the way we compensate executives.  That's why he instituted -- has instituted transparency.  I think part of the reason --

Q    Is there going to be a change in the -- I mean, look at the campaign donation issue, where you have Goldman and AIG and -- I mean, even Senator Obama received money from AIG, and it's -- I mean, is that part of this perception you guys have to get rid of, too, is just how easily Wall Street sort of --

MR. GIBBS:  No, again, I reject the criticism that -- how many times have I been asked in this room about how we were doing things that were so antithetical to Wall Street so as to see these precipitous point declines, and what were we doing about it, you know?  I mean, you know, I hate to bring them back into this, but -- it wasn't you, but somebody representing your network asked me about the criticisms of Jim Cramer bringing down the market, you know, and in 10 days' time we're -- you know, we're bound inextricably together.

I mean, you know, I think there's -- I don't think anybody that either watched the campaign or has watched the first nearly eight weeks of this administration would believe that the actions that the President of the United States has taken have been one and the same in what Wall Street (inaudible).  And I can assure you and the American people that the steps he'll take in regulatory reform and in the steps he will take to stabilize the banks may or may not be all of what investors like.

Just today, the head of Wells Fargo described our bank health assessment with a word that I'd rather not repeat even for cable.  (Laughter.)  Right?  So maybe if this is broadcast on FX at some point, we can get into it.  (Laughter.)

But I think it's -- I think it's more than a bit of a stretch to compare what we've done as being inextricably --

Q    -- it's this whole soup of Washington and Wall Street and what Joe Smith in Kansas City sees.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- here's what -- let me reassure Joe that this President has taken strong steps to ensure that the way we compensate executives won't be the same as when we came in the front door; that the way we regulate our financial markets won't be the same as when we came in the front door; and that we will change, as we committed to in the campaign, the way Washington does business.  That I can assure Joe and hundreds of millions of other Americans.

Laura.

Q    Just to -- just to be clear on what you guys are saying in terms of your approach to AIG now, are you saying that you'll hold back the $30 billion if they don't agree to give the bonuses back?

MR. GIBBS:  No, I think that -- what I'm saying is, those terms are being finalized; that Treasury has instruments that can address the excessive retention bonuses, and add provisions to ensure that taxpayers are made whole.

Q    But --

MR. GIBBS:  And again, I don't want to get ahead of that finalization.

Q    But I just want to be clear, is that you're saying that this -- this $30 billion is on the line, that if this --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I --

Q    -- were you not able to reach agreement --

MR. GIBBS:  I think that --

Q    -- you will not give them that money?

MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't want to -- I want to talk about the notion that rules governing that transaction can be finalized in a way as to protect the taxpayers.

Q    But I don't understand what that means, "that rules can be finalized in a way" -- I mean, is that -- are you saying that you'll impose these rules --

MR. GIBBS:  I would use terms that -- there's a $30-billion loan facility; a loan that, as I understand it, hasn't been drawn down on -- right?  So since the rules to drawing down on that have been finalized, taxpayer protections in order to make people whole can be added.

Q    So are you saying that the administration will add those protections and --

MR. GIBBS:  I -- yes.  I think I was -- I want to be as clear as I can be in what I just said.

Yes, Mark.

Q    Robert, are you saying that the President is worried that the number of Americans who support the bailout program will diminish further because of these bonuses that came to light over the weekend?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President shares the concerns of millions of Americans that have woken up time after time to hear news like what they heard yesterday.  He shared that concern -- that concern didn't start yesterday, it started a long time ago.  It started when this President believed that our economy was getting off its track and that steps had not been taken to regulate the financial industry in a way that would have prevented what we see happening now from happening.

Look, I think it shakes the confidence in any institution to see what's happened.  I don't -- let's not limit it to the steps that one has to take to stabilize the banks.  I think there's -- I think when people wake up and see news that is -- that offends their sense of common sense -- like this does -- that it affects their confidence not only in governmental institutions, but it affects their confidence in business as well.  I don't think anybody is immune to that.

Q    Why shouldn't taxpayers feel like they're being taken for suckers?

MR. GIBBS:  Because this President is -- has asked that we look at ways to ensure that taxpayers will be protected and has instituted tough rules to ensure that the steps we take to stabilize our economy and our financial system are done not to protect Wall Street, but to protect Main Street.

That why I think you saw the President here today talking about a small business lending program that is designed to help small businesses and community banks with an infusion of capital to be lent so that hundreds and hundreds of small businesses that are creating jobs in this country don't fall victim to a lack of credit, don't fall victim to an economic slowdown, and are able to get the financial lifeblood that they need to keep their business up and running.

The President and his team work each and every day to see what can be done to stabilize that financial system, to create jobs and to change the rules of the road going forward.

Ed.

Q    Robert, two quick questions.  On AIG, would it be fair to assess the President's use of the bully pulpit going forward to affect public policy on something over which he may have no other recourse?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the simple existence of using the bully pulpit in moving and -- in moving and in shaping public opinion shows that he does have some recourse, that he does have the ability.  Again, just last week we -- I got a question about why nobody was traveling to Nevada because of what the President had said.  I think what the President can do is use the bully pulpit to ensure that as taxpayers are taking extraordinary steps to stabilize our financial system, that they can be reasonably assured and confident that the steps that government is taking are done not at the behest of those on Wall Street, but instead to protect those on Main Street.

Q    And with the prospect of a trade war with Mexico, what is the President's sense of urgency in getting some legislation moving on this --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again --

Q    -- considering what's already on everybody's plate?

MR. GIBBS:  I think we understand -- and I've certainly said it, and the President said it to President Calderón when they met earlier in January -- that we see Mexico as a valuable trading partner.  Obviously exports create jobs here in this country and we don't want to find ourselves, in a time of economic slowdown, creating or erecting a barrier to that valuable trading partnership.

So the President, through the Secretary of Transportation, the Trade Rep, and the Secretary of State, believes this is an important priority.  And without having a specific timetable, and acknowledging that we have a lot on our plate, obviously this would be one of the most important things.

Major.

Q    Robert, I want to go over something you said a few minutes ago.  Roughly, you said, whether anyone in their wildest dreams could have imagined the complex transactions that AIG got involved in, you weren't sure.  Is that a statement about AIG, specifically, or the larger securitization of mortgages and things that grew out of the bank reforms of 1999?  And is that in some way absolving regulators --

MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't -- well, I think it goes to both, and I don't think it absolves regulators at all.  And if anybody took that to mean I was absolving those that are supposed to referee the transactions of this economy, that shouldn't be the case.

Q    Does it speak to the complexity of the transactions themselves and how --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, there's no doubt that they're complex.  But I think -- I don't think complexity should give license for irresponsibility or untold greed.  That's why the President believes that we have to take critical steps to re-regulate the way our financial system is viewed; that in a 21st-century global economy, we certainly don't have a 21st-century regulatory framework.  That's what -- that's part of the main docket at the G20 in London in a few weeks, that's what the President has talked about since September of 2007 -- that we have to take strong steps to change the way people do business in order to ensure that we don't find ourselves having the discussions about these companies, and bailing them out as we are right now.

Q    So just so I understand, the point was Dr. Summers and those involved in that legislation may not have been able to see the complexities of that transaction, but regulators should have.  Is that fair?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, no, no.  I was pushing back a little bit of -- on what I believe Chuck was trying to do in basically attaching Dr. Summers as being the culprit in AIG.

Q    That isn't what I was --

Q    But many thought --

MR. GIBBS:  It was sort of what you were doing.  (Laughter.)

Q    I can read directly from his congressional testimony.

MR. GIBBS:  I bet you can.  And I -- which seems to me to go back to the point that I was just trying to make that you pushed back on.

Q    But the point was the fact that everybody --

Q    But, Robert, many at the time, including Dr. Summers, thought that that legislation was a good idea -- to update Glass-Steagall.  And what I'm saying is, if they thought it was a good idea, are you saying that's fine, but regulators should have been smarter than the lawmakers --

MR. GIBBS:  No, I think the President spoke --

Q    -- and the administration officials who put in motion at the time.

MR. GIBBS:  I think the President spoke clearly about what he saw as a bad turn -- lessening those regulations have cost our economy.  I think he spoke clearly to that in the campaign.  I think even before getting into a discussion about that, again, in September of 2007 on Wall Street, the President outlined deficiencies.

I don't think the President would absolve -- would absolve anybody.  It's his job, though, as we move forward, to institute that regulatory framework that allows our economy to function in a way that gives confidence not just to people on Wall Street but to people on Main Street that transactions can happen in a reasonable and responsible manner.

That's what the President will look to do, and that's the priority in heading -- one of the priorities heading into London, and certainly one of the President's priorities this year, in understanding that to address the totality of our financial challenges, we have to address not just recovery and jobs, not just home foreclosures, not just financial stability in the banking system, but also those rules of the road, going forward.

Yes, sir.

Q    Back to the Vice President's interview, why do you believe he chose this moment to give such an extensive and pointed interview?  And what does the White House think this says about the Republican Party, that Rush Limbaugh and the former Vice President, who seem to be taking the highest profile positions in making the counter-arguments of the Obama administration policies?

MR. GIBBS:  You know, I can't speak to the motivations of why the Vice President availed himself to a Sunday morning interview.  That's I think something better left for -- for him and his handlers.

I think the steps that the President has taken to keep this country safe underscore the seriousness with which he takes that job; the seriousness with which he takes protecting our values; and the seriousness with which he takes in protecting our men and women in uniform; and in also projecting an image in the world that allows us to work with other nations.

I think as we move forward both in the G20, NATO, the Summit of the Americas, obviously we see challenges throughout the world that are going to require not just the opinions of one country and one administration, but the world acting and working together to address these global problems.

Q    I'd like to go back to AIG again because I'm having trouble understanding -- just figuring out how, given that the administration concluded already that these contracts are legally binding, are we now saying that that was a bad legal assessment and we actually can do something?

MR. GIBBS:  I think the President has asked them to redouble any efforts that have been made to ensure that all legal avenues are examined in order to take a look at these bonuses.

Q    So he thinks there's still another legal avenue that --

MR. GIBBS:  I think he's asked them to come back with an assessment as to whether that's the case.

Yes, sir.

Q    Robert, Christina Romer yesterday on the Sunday shows said that the fundamentals of the U.S. economy are sound.  Last Friday, the President himself spoke about sound fundamentals in the economy.  Yet when John McCain said that on the campaign trail last fall, he was "out of touch" and was portrayed that way by then-Senator Obama.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that --

Q    What's the difference?  Are the fundamentals so much sounder now?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, if I remember -- if I remember correctly what then-candidate McCain said, he said that the fundamentals of our economy were strong.  I would tell you that I think that the United States -- nobody exceeds the United States in our production capacity, in our entrepreneurial capacity, in our capacity to innovate, in our research universities, in the depth and the breadth of our capital markets.

But as the President addressed in the debates later that fall, he said that the strength of our fundamentals should be measured as to whether the middle class is getting a fair shake -- are we taking steps to create jobs; are we taking steps to prevent home foreclosures; are we taking steps to put money back in people's pockets who most deserve it, rather than to continue tax cuts that reward those that have done just fine over eight years.

Remember the backdrop of this entire debate was:  action versus inaction.  There was a great debate about the exact financial regulatory structure that we have discussed throughout today's briefing.  The question was, were we going to move forward in a plan that would create jobs, a plan that would stem home foreclosures, a plan that would reward the middle class with tax cuts, and a plan that would re-regulate our financial industry -- or were we not?

I think that debate is largely over.  I think that campaign was won by a particular side.  And the President, as he said, has taken steps to ensure that each of the pillars of our economy that need to be in place in order to strengthen and turn it around, he's working on putting those in place just this year.

Q    You're saying the difference is between the use of the word "sound" versus the use of the word "strong" -- is that what you're saying?

MR. GIBBS:  I'd certainly think that's one of them, yes.  Do I think there's a definitional difference between "sound" and "strong"?  Absolutely.

Q    Okay.  And the fundamentals are now not strong, still, -- they're sound?

MR. GIBBS:  I think the fundamentals, as Ms. Romer said, are sound; that the President is taking steps each and every day to strengthen those fundamentals, to ensure that the pillars that we need to turn our economy around to create the jobs the President talked about, to give the middle class finally a fair shake, and to put ourselves on a path towards sustained economic growth, is exactly what the President is focused on each and every day.

Q    Using that phrase does not make the people now sound as out of touch as John McCain may have sounded, with a slightly different -- with a different word.

MR. GIBBS:  I don't think so.

Lynne.

Q    Back to AIG, here's what I -- I guess I would hope you could help me out with.  The President -- I always like to believe by the White House that Secretary Geithner had really given it his best shot in trying to renegotiate terms with Chairman Liddy and had to -- he had won concessions --

MR. GIBBS:  Right.

Q    -- from him, and that they had gone through legal counsel to see what legal options were there, and they had done this already.

So what would this re-examination turn up that did not do already just a few days ago?  And why (inaudible) to incorporate this thought?  The thought I got back from the White House yesterday was that these are contracts, and contracts are -- can't be broken, yet you're encouraging people to renegotiate mortgages, the auto workers have to renegotiate in connection with the auto bailout.

MR. GIBBS:  Right.  Well, your first question -- the President has asked that -- and that he be assured again that all steps will be taken to look into what remedies on behalf of the taxpayers are available to him.  That's what the President has asked the Secretary to do.  I think you appropriately point out that the Secretary made progress in dialing back the full function of what AIG had planned to do.  And again, that's exactly the nature with which the President has asked --

Q    Do you think there were some remedies that maybe --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, that's --

Q    -- Geithner didn't think of or the crew didn't think of, but now they're all --

MR. GIBBS:  I can assure you the President has asked him to ensure that that's the case.

Q    And just a point of clarification, do you want the money back eventually, to get it just back to make the taxpayers whole from the company?  Or do you in a sense want to make sure that these retention bonuses, the workers who got them, have to give it back?  Or do you just want the company to give it back?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I'm not sure, based on the fungibility of money what -- what entirely would be the difference.  I think what -- taxpayers have to be reasonably assured that -- that their money that's given for the use in banking and financial stabilization is done so in a way that gives them transparency and confidence.

Q    Well, so you probably can't get it from the individual --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, we'll -- that's exactly what the President has --

Q    And I just need a comment on the equity issues dealing with give-backs from auto workers and renegotiating mortgages and this situation?

MR. GIBBS:  I can certainly look into the auto thing.  In terms of -- I guess with home foreclosures, do you mean --

Q    The idea that people are being asked to renegotiate contracts all the time, yet in AIG the explanation was that these are contracts and they can't -- must be honored.

MR. GIBBS:  Right, but what, specifically, in home foreclosure -- obviously refinancing takes place with --

Q    I won't belabor the point --

MR. GIBBS:  -- two agreed upon lending parties, though.

Q    Oh, that's renegotiation -- that's all.

MR. GIBBS:  Right, but I think it's been reasonably assumed in this case that there are -- there's not a willing -- they're not -- there's not a reciprocal willing party.

Yes, ma'am.

Q    Can you tell us about the President's plan to visit an electric vehicle plant later on this week in California?  Could you give us a little bit more detail on that?

MR. GIBBS:  I don't have a ton with me, but the President, I think it is Thursday morning in California, is going to tour a facility that focuses on batteries.  Obviously there's -- there are incentives in the stimulus to spur this type of research.  And obviously as we imagine an auto industry for the future -- and I know the auto industry has put a lot of research and funding into the development of cars that can go 40 miles an hour on one charge of a battery.

The President hopes to focus and highlight the ability for clean energy jobs to spur economic growth and job creation as we move forward.

Yes.

Q    Robert, the President sent two Cabinet Secretaries down to New Orleans to survey damage about a week and a half ago.  While they were there, they said they were disturbed and even angry at the amount of red tape that they saw and a lot of backlog with FEMA and other issues.  How did the President receive that report, and what is his next step with the Gulf Coast?

MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- let me check with our DHS Secretary and our Housing Secretary to see what they've come through with and to what degree they've come up with formulations for the President.

Q    But he heard them say they were disturbed and angry that day.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think it's safe to say that the President didn't need to send two Cabinet Secretaries down to New Orleans to be disturbed and angry at the fact that there are, years after a hurricane struck, much progress to be made, people still living in trailers.  And that's even before you get to the response of how the hurricane was dealt with and the ups and downs that we've gone through just in dealing with the temporary assisted housing as it relates to Hurricane Katrina.  I'll follow up specifically with those two Secretaries.

Q    Thank you.

MR. GIBBS:  Thank you.

END
3:43 P.M. EDT
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/17/09
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
___________________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                                        March 17, 2009

PRESS BRIEFING
BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
2:15 P.M. EDT

MR. GIBBS:  Good afternoon.  Happy St. Patrick's Day to everyone.  I think I'm settled. 

Ms. Loven.

Q    Thank you.  Back to AIG, revisiting yesterday.  It seems clearer, even clearer now that the administration should have known about this new round of bonuses as early as January.  But I think Secretary Geithner said he only knew about it last week.  And the question is why didn't he know about it sooner?  Did he talk to the President about it, and why didn't the President start talking about it until yesterday, and officials over the weekend?

MR. GIBBS:  I have seen what the Secretary said in the paper about his knowledge of these bonuses.  I don't -- I have not talked to the President specifically about when he was informed.  I do know that Secretary Geithner last week engaged with the CEO of AIG to communicate what we thought were outrageous and unacceptable bonuses; that Secretary Geithner received a commitment to lessen some of the bonuses for senior executives, a promise for the restructuring moving forward; that obviously this bumped up against a contractual deadline of March 15th, but that the Secretary of Treasury did as much in his legal power at the time to lessen the impact of what we all understand is outrageous.

The President yesterday has asked that we continue to look for ways to either block or recoup that money.  There are certainly provisions, whether it's in existing law or whether specifically in provisions -- executive compensation provisions  that are contained in the Recovery and Reinvestment Act that contain a safe harbor for preexisting contracts -- they're looking and working on that as a possible avenue that the President talked about yesterday.

But I also want to point to a couple of things that the President and the economic team are focused on going forward, because I think this situation and many of the situations that we have found ourselves in as a result of the amazing economic challenges that we have -- the President is also focused on two very important things going forward; the first being reissuing his call to move as quickly as possible to institute financial regulatory reform so that whatever mechanisms were used to effect companies that have gotten us -- companies and banks and insurance companies -- into the situation that we're in now never happen again.

And secondly, and equally as importantly, that the law provide for this current administration -- but for there be some legal remedy with which a resolution mechanism can take place.  And what I mean by that if a business -- if a small business gets in trouble, you can take that small business -- that small business can go into bankruptcy.  And as a result of provisions in bankruptcy, lots can be changed in terms of existing agreements.

If a small bank gets in trouble, the FDIC comes in and does that.  For something the size of a big bank or AIG, there still is in existing law no remedy with which to unwind and resolve the problems that exist in order to protect the taxpayer.  So the President, in addition to financial regulatory reform, would seek a resolution authority in order to break apart, unwind and finally resolve the issues that we face with systemic risk.

Q    I understand all that.  I understand you want to look forward.  But is there a sense here at all that Secretary Geithner did not foresee what a public relations problem this might not be -- not get the White House involved or informed --

MR. GIBBS:  I think that would be very unfair -- well, first of all, let me say the President has complete confidence.  Secondly, I think it would be very unfair, based on the actions that the Secretary of Treasury took in order, as we got closer to the pending legal deadline, to restructure what could be restructured, and to change for the future, to get that commitment was an extremely important protection for the American taxpayers.  Look --

Q    The White House didn't start talking about this until after that deadline had passed.  And I'm wondering if that's because --

MR. GIBBS:  Sorry, what's that?

Q    The White House didn't start talking about this issue until after the deadline was already over.  So I'm wondering if that's because the White House hadn't been informed by Geithner of what was coming, or what the reason is for that.

MR. GIBBS:  I think what's important most of all are the actions that were taken -- the extraordinary actions that were taken to protect the American taxpayers in accordance with all that we could do as we look back to recoup what can be recouped, and to go forward in ensuring that there are protections both in the regulatory structure and in the resolution mechanism to deal with this.

I think many of the problems that we deal with -- you know, we've had occasion in this room to talk about what happens if there are catastrophic failures, particularly of entities that pose the size of systemic risk that a corporation like AIG could cause.  And having something like that declare bankruptcy or fail to exist we all have understood provides a massive systemic risk of which nobody wants to face.

Obviously, I think the Secretary of Treasury took extraordinary steps based on contracts that were in existence in April of last year in order to do all that he could to protect the taxpayer.

Yes, sir.

Q    There is an interesting suggestion that's coming out of Congress on how that money might be recouped.  Congressman Barney Frank has suggested that the government, as a majority stakeholder, would be in a position to sue AIG to recoup that money.  And some Senate Democrats, led by Harry Reid, are warning employees that they should return money or else face a massive tax bill -- in other words, getting that money taxed --

MR. GIBBS:  Right.

Q    Can you address how the administration would view those proposals, whether they're seen as viable?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think two things -- obviously, as the President mentioned yesterday and as I just talked about here, the President has asked us to do everything possible to look at recoupment for these retention bonuses that he and all of us find outrageous -- whether that's in, as I mentioned, the existing law that was passed as part of the recovery and reinvestment plan, or whether that is, secondly, some mix of new legislation that's proposed -- the administration and the legal team would certainly look at those as it is looking at existing law, including the Dodd provisions, in order to meet the test of looking at all remedies at recoupment, including whether it's changing the tax code, or whatever ideas I think percolate between now and whenever coming out of Congress.  Obviously, the President is committed to working as quickly as possible with Congress to find ways to recoup this money.

Q    Is filing a lawsuit seen as a real possibility?

MR. GIBBS:  I'd certainly have to ask the legal team.  I think, obviously, as it's been mentioned in some of the stories, there are the potential for penalties that could increase the cost of what we're talking about exponentially.

Jake.

Q    The Treasury Department was informed about the AIG bonuses last September, during the previous administration.  Secretary Geithner learned about the bonuses, I suppose, Wednesday of last week or around then.  Can you walk us through what members of your administration learned about the bonuses and when they learned about them?

MR. GIBBS:  I don't have a particular tick-tock in front of me.  And obviously, I was not involved in all of those conversations.  I outlined that the Secretary was obviously involved in conversations with the company to extract concessions regarding senior executive bonuses and how one might go about changing retention bonuses in existing contracts for the future.

Q    That was Wednesday, right?

MR. GIBBS:  I think that was over the course of several days, leading up to the legal deadline of March 15th, and obviously, what the President talked about yesterday in asking us to go back and look at the recoupment possibilities and the stuff that's being proposed in Congress.

Q    I guess just the question I have is if -- you said that you have confidence, the President has confidence in Secretary Geithner.  Are you confident that the oversight process is working?  If these bonuses had been -- the Treasury Department had known about these bonuses since September, Secretary Geithner didn't act on it until last week.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I don't -- let me make sure

-- I mean, obviously, you and I understand this, but let's make sure everybody understands that there was a change of administration between September of 2008 and what we're talking about even at some point last week.

Q    Okay, right, that's what I'm saying, that clearly somebody dropped the ball.  Somebody didn't tell Secretary Geithner about this, or Secretary --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's also understand -- let's also understand that these are contracts that existed, as I understand it -- and I prefaced this yesterday by, not surprisingly, telling you I'm not a contracts lawyer -- these contracts were entered into, as I understand it, in April of 2008, long before any entity of the government got involved in a rescue and a restructuring process -- that existed even before Congress passed the Trouble Asset Relief Program and where we find ourselves in the second tranche of that money today.

Q    Right.  But certainly you would grant that you wish that you had known about these bonuses before the $30 billion that you guys gave -- or lent AIG a few weeks ago.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again that -- as I said yesterday, and maybe I wasn't as clear -- that $30 billion facility has not been acted on, and that there are recoupment possibilities as a part of conditioning additional future assistance, of which that $30 billion is part of.

Q    Do you not see that -- are you confident that the oversight process at Treasury is working properly?

MR. GIBBS:  I am confident the oversight process is working.  Am I confident -- what I think the President and all of America are outraged about is the message that any bonus like this sends; that as I said yesterday, and as the President said, it offends our common sense.  It offends our values.  It sends the wrong message by giving and rewarding the very entities which took a company like AIG with a hedge fund placed on top of it, and ran the entire company into the ground to the point where taxpayers have had to inject $170 billion.  I think everybody is offended by every aspect of that.   

Q    But why didn't you know about it until last week?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- again, I will check on some exact tick-tock.  But understand, there's a contract -- there are existing contracts.  The Secretary of Treasury did each and every -- did everything that we know of humanly possible to change the structure of what AIG ultimately was required to pay out -- change that structure going forward. 

The President has asked the team here to examine ways in which we can go back in terms of a look back and a recoupment process that includes the process in the Dodd amendment -- the Dodd legislation that was in part of the Recovery and Reinvestment, as well as mechanisms moving forward to do that. 

Q    I guess -- maybe I'm beating a dead horse here --

MR. GIBBS:  That's what I do all day.  (Laughter.)  Giddy-up.   

Q    -- but I'm not hearing the answer.  I mean, is it possible -- is it possible that Secretary Geithner did not completely inform the President about what was happening here until it really just all blew up?

MR. GIBBS:  No, because -- now, let's understand again the reason that something couldn't be done -- the reason, ultimately there was -- ultimately, AIG made a determination, based on existing contracts, that they had no choice, right?

Q    I know the background to it, but --

MR. GIBBS:  But let's not -- let's understand that that background governs a lot that we're discussing here today, right?  Contracts law.  Again, I'm not a contract lawyer, but I understand some of the ramifications of that.

The President is satisfied that we are taking the steps necessary to recoup this money, but, again, is completely outraged at the entire process that has led us to this point, that has provided the very employees, AIG Financial Products, the very employees that have found the taxpayers on the hook for tens of billions, hundreds of billions of dollars, receiving the wrong message through a bonus -- he finds that offensive.  That's why he's instructed us to take the steps -- all steps that we can, humanly possible, up to that deadline, and after that deadline to recoup that money.

Q    Has the President then satisfied that he found out about this in a timely manner?

MR. GIBBS:  Yes, the President is satisfied.  The President will not be satisfied until we've exhausted every avenue that he instructed us to yesterday, and the President certainly won't be satisfied until, moving forward, we have changed the way we do business in Washington, changed the way we do business on Wall Street, to ensure that there's a financial regulatory system that's in place in order not to find things like AIG happening again; and finally, as I said, that there's a mechanism, a legal mechanism that would help us unwind and finally deal with the problem of AIG.

Again, I use this example.  If you're a small business, you can change these things through bankruptcy, right?  If you're a community bank that gets in trouble -- and we've all seen them, you've all written about them -- FDIC comes in, takes them over and changes the way they do business.  But for an entity of the size and the structure of AIG, there's not a legal mechanism with which to resolve those issues in a way that protects the taxpayer.  That's part of which -- part of what the President would like to see as a portion of financial regulatory reform.

Chip.  Go ahead.

Q    I think only about half of the AIG bonuses to this, the Financial Products unit, have been paid at this point.  I think there's still about $200 million due.  When the next round of AIG bonuses comes due, will the President say no?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, that's exactly what Secretary Geithner has talked to the CEOs about moving forward to restructure.  I think that's what I alluded to, that Secretary Geithner had taken all humanly possible steps in order to change that.

Q    But the federal government owns 80 percent of AIG.  Can't the President simply say, no, we're not making those payments?

MR. GIBBS:  Again, I'd refer you to a contract lawyer, which I'm not one.  But obviously, Chip, if it were as easy as all of that, I can assure you we'd be talking about Russia.

Q    One follow-up.  You've mentioned that the President and the American people are outraged.  There are some on Capitol Hill who have questioned his outrage.  They say, how can he come out and say he's outraged when his economic team had just thoroughly looked into these payments and concluded they had to be made?

MR. GIBBS:  I suggest that there's very little basis for any of those -- for any of that thought.  I don't think anybody on Capitol Hill should doubt the genuineness of the outrage. 

There was -- understand that the compensation structure for executives prior to the President of the United States, Barack Obama, laying out the way we're going to do business changing, there was -- Barack Obama came in and there was a new sheriff in town on executive compensation.  He changed the way we did business here and the way Wall Street did business, by instituting the toughest executive compensation rules that had ever been entered into, changing the lawlessness with which all of this was governed prior to that announcement.

So I think it would bear some going back to any of the critics of the President's genuine outrage and ask them what they did or didn't do to change the way executives are compensated before Barack Obama got to town as President of the United States -- and in one of his very first announcements, financial announcements, argued for a change going forward in the way we compensate executives.

Q    One other.  You said you haven't talked to the President yet about when he learned about these bonuses.  Could I just put in a request that you ask him when he learned?

MR. GIBBS:  I will write that down.  (Laughter.)

Chuck.

Q    First of all, why haven't you asked the President when he learned about this?

MR. GIBBS:  There are a lot of questions I haven't asked the President, Chuck.  We can enumerate them.

Q    Is the problem when trying to figure out where the oversight slipped up in the fact that it is not clear?  Does AIG answer to the Federal Reserve or to the Treasury Department?  Is that the issue here?

MR. GIBBS:  I don't know the answer to that, honestly.  I don't.

Q    You said -- I mean, does the -- what is the answer to that question?

MR. GIBBS:  Let me ask somebody who works on this full-time.

Q    We don't know who sort of has government oversight over AIG right now?  The Federal Reserve or the Treasury Department?

MR. GIBBS:  I can either take your question or you can ask and surmise its answer.

Q    It's not answered in the tone.  No, no, no, I --

MR. GIBBS:  Go ahead.  I'm --

Q    So we don't know who has oversight over AIG?

MR. GIBBS:  Chuck, you've asked me a question of which I am going to find you an accurate answer, so that by the time you transmit this to the world you'll have a good answer.

Q    You were going to find out for me whether torture applies to --

MR. GIBBS:  Ms. Thomas, I have.

Q    -- Abu Ghraib and Bagram and the black holes and --

MR. GIBBS:  Yes.  The law that governs employees of this government bans torture. 

This is an easy process.  You ask the question, I take it, I get an answer.

Q    I just hope --I don't want to wait until tomorrow.

MR. GIBBS:  Well --

Q    You made poor Helen wait until tomorrow -- 24 hours.

MR. GIBBS:  Maybe you're torturing me and Helen.  (Laughter.)

Q    Don't give us any ideas.  (Laughter.) 

MR. GIBBS:  I would posit that the CIA should look at the process in which I'm undergoing -- (laughter) -- if this is applicable under the Geneva Convention.  Where's my contract lawyer?

Q    I'll cede my time here.  (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS:  Yes, sir.

Q    Is the President concerned about the tone coming from Capitol Hill, that you've got one senator advocating for hari-kari -- not the Cubs announcer.  Another senator talking about 90 percent taxation.  Is there a concern that sometimes there might be this overreaction and then suddenly it doesn't look like that it's a productive conversation?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think Senator Grassley has modified some of --

Q    He didn't back down.

MR. GIBBS:  No, but I -- well, I'm trying to help Senator Grassley -- even though he doesn't need it.  The President understands the outrage of members of Congress.  The President understands the outrage of every single American that finds what has happened for AIG, what has happened to our banking and financial system -- that the American people find how we got here, why we're here, and the steps that we regrettably have to take to stabilize that system -- why there's great offense and great consternation about it.

I don't -- I bet every one of us has talked to a friend outside the sphere of our work that finds this offensive.  I don't think that the offensiveness -- I'm sure knows, honestly, no bounds, and I think it's -- I think that's very understandable.  I think what --

Q    You're not concerned about Congress producing something that's done in haste and then suddenly you regret signing later because --

MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't -- look, I think the President will make determinations about legislation to support or sign based on what's best for the American people, first and foremost, what's best for the economy.  Look, again, I think the President has taken some important steps, as I mentioned, to change the way executive compensation is done in this country.  But, look, the President understands that the taxpayers have entrusted to him and to lawmakers in this town their hard-earned tax dollars that are being used to stabilize our financial system, and they understand the outrage when you hear about and read stories like this.

I think that the President, as I said, is focused on several things:  how do we recoup the money; but also so that we're not in this position again, so that this country doesn't find itself repeating this situation, we put in place strong rules and regulations and give this administration and any administration moving forward the tools to resolve these highly complex situations in a way that most protects the taxpayer.  I think that's -- he understands that's largely what he was elected to do and what he'll do.

Jonathan.

Q    Last night, administration officials said that after carefully reviewing the situation they concluded that under current law these contracts could not be broken without actually costing the taxpayers more money in legal fees than would have been recouped.  A few hours --

MR. GIBBS:  To break the --

Q    To break the contracts.  That under current law, to break those contracts would actually cost the taxpayers more money than to let the money go out.  About four hours before that, the President of the United States walked before the cameras and said that to block -- he promised to pursue every legal avenue to block these bonuses and make the American taxpayers whole.  Did the President, when he went before the camera, did he know at that time that the legal review had already concluded that actually to block those bonuses would be pretty much legally unfeasible?

MR. GIBBS:  Yes, and he asked us to look again.  That's what he announced at the remarks in which you point -- happened four hours earlier, and that's why the review of provisions in existing law, including the Dodd compensation requirements as contained in the Recovery and Reinvestment Act, are one of the avenues with which the administration continues to look.

Again, let's point out that that's a piece of legislation that Congress has passed but rules have yet to be promulgated on, which provides an interesting case because the legislation contains provisions dealing with TARP money and preexisting contracts.

Q    So when the administration officials came back four hours later and said, you know what, we can't really break these contracts, did that mean that the second review that the President was asking for was over and that --

MR. GIBBS:  No, I just -- I'm not announcing the end of the review.  I'm bringing you up to date on the existing review that takes place, including the provisions that I just read out.

Q    And, I'm sorry, one more, then.  And when Larry Summers went on television on Sunday morning and said, laws are laws, contracts are contracts; we have to respect them --

MR. GIBBS:  Again, you're -- now you're asking me about something that happened Sunday.  I've now brought you up to speed on what probably happened at around 4:00 p.m. on Monday.  So I think you can assume that what I've said about 4:00 p.m. on Monday brings you most up to date on a timeline that you're asking me about sometime on Sunday morning.

Q    But how much consultation with the economic team and the political team had been done before Mr. Summers, Dr. Summers's appearance on the Sunday shows?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, the legal deadline for the bonuses had passed.  There was a review and there's an existing review, as the President ordered yesterday.

Yes, sir.

Q    Robert, we understand from your answers here that you don't have knowledge of the exact timeline, but would it be accurate to say that you were blind-sided, that the President was blind-sided by this?

MR. GIBBS:  No.  And I will certainly seek better timeline answers to enumerate the negative answer I just gave you.

Q    Why wouldn't it be accurate to say that?

MR. GIBBS:  Because the Secretary obviously took steps last week to lessen the blow of what was both contractually obligated and what had been promised but was not part of a contract that lessened the amount of money that was paid out. 

Again, the Secretary of Treasury did good work in changing what was potentially out there, and I think obviously he did so in order to protect the American taxpayers.  And that's why I think -- that's the basis for me answering that question.

Q    One other thing.  Could you elaborate on this resolution authority you mentioned?

MR. GIBBS:  I will get somebody on the econ team to explain it.  I can't profess that they'll explain it in better English.  But basically you've got -- you have to have a mechanism by which to separate and unwind something as big as AIG is.  No entity exists in law short of bankruptcy, though we've all determined through many different avenues including what happened last September, that that's not a very good option.  So having the ability to resolve these issues short of a catastrophic event for our financial system, there has to be a process by which the terms of business can be changed in order to orderly wind down part of a business that, in this case, is working quite poorly, and another otherwise fairly healthy business that might struggle in any economic period, based on the fact that insurance companies have a lot of investment -- having a process to break that, unwind it, protect the taxpayers all at the same time doesn't exist short of what most -- I think almost everybody would say is a catastrophic financial event. 

Q    Do the autos fit into that?  Is this the same --

MR. GIBBS:  I think you're talking about a little bit of a potentially separate deal based on the structure of what you determine.

Q    We're reporting that AIG -- they budgeted $57 million in part of the billion-dollar retention program to pay -- as retention pay for employees whose jobs are ultimately going to be eliminated at the company.  Does the administration see that $57 million in retention paid for jobs that will be eliminated the same as these bonuses, and wouldn't that be --

MR. GIBBS:  I have not seen -- I'm not up on what aspect of that you're talking about, but I'd be happy to look at it and have a --

Q    Well, how would you view AIG setting aside $57 million to pay -- as retention payments for employees that are going to have their jobs eliminated?

MR. GIBBS:  Let me take the question more broadly.  The President finds it outrageous and offensive for any of these bonuses to exist.

Major.

Q    I’m going to break your heart, Robert -- two questions not related to AIG.  (Laughter.)  On February 12th --

MR. GIBBS:  I just lost a lot of money to Bill Burton.  (Laughter.) 

Q    On February 12th in East Peoria, the President said this, referring to Jim Owens, the head of Caterpillar:  "If Congress passes our plan this company will be able to rehire some of the folks who were just laid off.  And that's a story I'm confident will be repeated at companies across the country, companies that are currently struggling to borrow money selling their products, struggling to make payroll, but could find themselves in a different position when we start implementing the plan."  Caterpillar, as you know, today laid off 2,400 workers, 911 of them at that very same plant.  On February 12th, who was wrong -- the President, Jim Owens, or is this just a result of the economy?

MR. GIBBS:  Multiple choice -- excellent.  Well, obviously, you mentioned in choice C -- obviously there is -- and we've talked about there have been changes in the trajectory of our economy in the first quarter and certainly a change in what people believe to be the health of the economy at the end of the last quarter.  Obviously I think businesses are having to make decisions that affect both the short and the long term.  We're confident, as the CEO is confident, that in the long run, based on the Recovery and Reinvestment Act, the money that's been let will provide business opportunities for the country -- I'm sorry, for the company. 

Obviously you all mentioned in here that the company had concerns about provisions that would limit its ability to export to foreign countries that were modified.  You know, in the intervening time period in which we visited Caterpillar and today, the recovery plan that the President signed has allocated $28 billion to states for highway construction; 37 states have filed spending plans on how exactly to spend that money.  So obviously much of the equipment that you saw built at Caterpillar might certainly change as a result of some of that money.  Eight billion dollars has been allocated for mass transit systems.  Eight billion dollars has been allocated -- this is outside of the purview of road construction companies, but $8 billion for weatherization programs; $2 billion for law enforcement needs. 

Q    Can you see how maybe some folks who remember seeing that event might find this news acutely troubling?  The President went there with the prospect that it was exactly this kind of company that would be most reassured about its future investment practices based on the promise of money from the federal government and --

MR. GIBBS:  I think that as the money begins to go out -- including the money that I just talked about having gone out over the course of the past several weeks -- that businesses not just like Caterpillar, but businesses throughout the country, teachers in schools that potentially face layoffs, cops that the President visited that might lose their job -- that the President believes as the money begins to get let out as a result of the Recovery and Reinvestment plan that businesses will make different economic decisions.

I think the American people we believe will make different economic decisions based on the fact that in about two weeks the withholding tables will change and tax cuts that the President campaigned and promised -- campaigned on and promised will start showing up in their paychecks.

Q    One other quick policy question.  The President met yesterday with about 11 veterans groups, and discussed with the chief of staff and the head of the Veterans Administration the concept -- which hasn't been put in the President's budget yet, but it's on the table -- of having third-party insurance companies pay for combat-related injuries -- something that's never happened before.  The American Legion put out a very strong letter today condemning that; IABA also has questioned this very strongly.  Can you conceptually explain to the American people why for the first time it would be a good idea to think about the Veterans Administration having a third-party private insurance company pay for combat-related injuries?

MR. GIBBS:  Let me not make the case for a decision that this administration hasn't made yet regarding the final disposition or decision on third-party billing as it relates to service-related injuries.

Q    It is on the table, though, correct?

MR. GIBBS:  But no decisions have been made.  Let me give this answer to -- and I know that the veterans, the VSOs, the Veterans Service Organizations that were here yesterday to meet with the President, the VA chief and the Chief of Staff, who will return later in the week to meet again with the Chief of Staff, can have confidence that the budget the President has proposed represents an historic increase in discretionary spending to take care of our wounded warriors, those that have been sent off to war, have protected our freedom and have come back wounded.  There's an 11-percent increase in discretionary spending in the VA budget, an historic jump -- because this President takes very seriously the needs of our wounded warriors that have given so much to protect our freedom on battlefields throughout the world.

Q    But why would this even be on the table?

MR. GIBBS:  Again, I think the President and the VSOs had a good conversation, and the veterans can be assured that the President understands any concerns that they would have, as well as shares -- looks forward to sharing with them the fact that the budget represents an historic increase for discretionary spending as it relates to taking care of wounded warriors.

Yes, sir.

Q    Maybe help you win a little money back from Burton when we get back to AIG.  (Laughter.)

Just first a request to add on to Chip and the others.  As you are getting this timeline for us, perhaps you could look into the extent to which this subject was raised at the daily briefings on Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday mornings, and if the subject of these bonuses at AIG were discussed at any other meetings with the President, the Chief of Staff, yourself, during the course of the kind of period we're talking about -- from the Wednesday conversation that Mr. Geithner had with the CEO leading up to the President's comments on Monday.

And a second question on this, which is the issue of contracts seems not to have been of that much concern in past expressions of outrage by the President.  In other words, when the President expressed outrage about companies having $50 million jets and having posh parties -- those things often involve contracts that are often broken when you get rid of the plane or you don't have the posh party that you planned.  Are those things simply a different kind of contract?  Or is it that it involves less money?  In other words --

MR. GIBBS:  You know, I don't have access to the details of a contract for a private jet or a Super Bowl party.  I honestly don't -- I think it might be hard to compare contracts -- contract to contract, without knowing exactly what legal mechanism is contained in them and what clause might -- what penalty or clause might be contained in that contract that did or didn't cause somebody to change their actions.

Q    I'm not going to ask you about AIG.  Russia -- the Russian President Medvedev today said that he's looking to a large-scale rearming of the military beginning in 2011.  How concerned is the administration about this, particularly given that we're supposed to be pushing that reset button?

MR. GIBBS:  And the President looks forward to meeting with President Medvedev in London at the beginning of the G20 economic summit.  I think the President of Russia talked about -- I don't have his comments in front of me, but --

Q    He blamed NATO encroachment for the need for this.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I would say obviously that NATO is a collective defense organization.  I think to suggest that it poses an offensive military threat is simply wrong.  NATO and the United States have worked, and will continue to work with Russia on issues of mutual concern, specifically in areas like terrorism and proliferation.

But having read the stories, it looked like the comments of the President of Russia were largely -- largely for domestic consumption.

Q    Robert, the California trip -- can you tell us about the town meeting tomorrow?  Is this part of the President's push-back on the budget and the notion he's biting off too much?  And also, can you tell us about the decision for him to do Jay Leno?

MR. GIBBS:  Yes.  The President's decision to go west and do two town hall meetings -- obviously, part of that is to discuss with the American people and give the American people the opportunity to discuss with him their concerns about the economic challenges that we face; for the President to be able to explain directly to the American people some of the choices that his administration -- and some of the challenges -- that they're taking on to solve those.

Obviously, I think among the topics we'll probably likely see are the recovery plan.  Given the -- given where we're going in California, I'd be surprised if the housing crisis and home foreclosures aren't part of that; obviously, financial stability; and I'm sure the outrageousness of executive compensation and bonuses will come up. 

But I think the President looks forward to the ability to talk directly with the American people about the many challenges that we have, the path the President believes is the best to lay that foundation for long-term economic growth, and how he hopes that Congress, Democrats and Republicans, will work with him to make that plan a reality.

Jay Leno, I think, is an opportunity to continue that same conversation.  I anticipate that a large amount of the discussion will center around the President's economic plans, and the President's economic ideas.  And I think the President believes it's a unique audience with which to explain those challenges and the decisions that he's made.

Q    He's the first President to do -- sitting President to do The Tonight Show --

Q    Second.

Q    Second sitting?

MR. GIBBS:  Uh-oh.

Q    Kennedy and Jack Paar, right?

MR. GIBBS:  Do you guys -- do you want to come up here?  (Laughter.)

Q    No, I'm glad to be -- have the record corrected.

MR. GIBBS:  Change again you can believe in.  (Laughter.)

Q    Is he practicing any zingers?

MR. GIBBS:  Lord knows he'll get the opportunity, I'm sure.  No, but, again, I don't think it -- we don't look at is as a -- the process of demonstrating the President's sense of humor.  We look at it as a way of discussing the economic situation that we find ourselves in.  Obviously California is one of the -- I think it's four states in the country that are experiencing double-digit unemployment.  They face budget challenges.  And I think all of those topics will be part of that discussion.

Margaret.

Q    Thanks, Robert.  The President made his first judicial pick today, David Hamilton.  And in sort of discussing it, a senior administration official talked about the President's desire to be -- to select judges who were empathetic to real people -- that was something he talked about on the campaign.  This is something that some -- particularly conservative critics have an issue with because they wonder how that wouldn't butt up against having to work within the rule of law, follow the rule of law.  And I'm wondering if you can address that, and also to tell us whether you would consider Judge Hamilton to be a moderate.

MR. GIBBS:  You know, let me resist the temptation to get involved in labels, but understand that what I think you're referring to from a senior administration official is something that he's enumerated many times in the past, and I would point you specifically to statements that he made surrounding confirmation votes for Justices Roberts and --

Q    Alito.

MR. GIBBS:  Alito.  I almost said Scalia and I knew he wasn't in the Senate at that time.  But that the President talked about there are -- the law will lead you to pretty clear conclusions on a vast majority of cases in interpreting either previous law, as well as the Constitution, but that -- and again, I'd point you to this, and we can certainly send it to you -- he'll be far more eloquent than I am in discussing the notion that there are cases that judges, particularly at this level, see that requires on -- regardless of which label you pick up, whether it's progressive, or conservative, or moderate, or what have you, that your own empathy and value system leads you to make a conclusion one way or the other.

The President believes that in making decisions on those justices, and in going forward and making judicial picks, that a wide variety of past experience and having the ability to empathize and walk in someone's shoes provides valuable perspective for somebody making important decisions from the bench.

Yes, sir.

Q    Thank you, Robert.  Yesterday, El Salvador elected a new President, and he is the first leader of that country to come from the FMLN in 20 years.  And this is a transition of government that's relatively fresh and recent.  Has the President been in touch with the President-elect of El Salvador?  And is there any discussion about the role of Venezuelan President Chavez in the election of other chiefs of state throughout Latin America?

MR. GIBBS:  I do not believe that the President has been in touch with the President-elect of El Salvador.

Q    He used the President's slogan in his campaign.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, it works here, too.  (Laughter.)  I did notice in news reports that the President-elect mentioned one of his first priorities in office is to strengthen the relationship that that country has with the United States of America.  The President will later -- I was going to say later this month, but it's about a month from now -- travel to the Summit of the Americas in Trinidad and Tobago to take part in the summit there, and to begin a renewed effort to change the way we view Latin America, and do so in a way that is beneficial for both Latin America and South America -- beneficial for them and for us.

April.

Q    Robert, going back to AIG quickly, remembering back a couple of months ago, before this administration came in, then-President George Bush was directing Hank Paulson to talk to the transition team, to talk to President Obama about AIG and other bailout companies.  Now, was AIG on -- and these bonuses -- on that agenda when Hank Paulson talked with the President?  And also --

MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- I don't know the answer to that question.

Q    Okay, well, can you please --

MR. GIBBS:  Let me see if there's somebody who might  --

Q    And also, on AIG, under the last -- under this contract from last year, does it include more bonuses, or is this the last round of bonuses from that contract?

MR. GIBBS:  Let me look -- on the contract. I mean, from what I read in the paper -- don't look -- I haven't even given you my answer -- I just said I looked in the paper, goodness.  What if I said I heard it on the radio?  (Laughter.)

Q    I'm looking for answers from here.

MR. GIBBS:  No, no, let me --

Q    I'm looking for answers for within the administration  -- not papers.

MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- I feel like a figure skater who hadn't even started and I've already gotten my grade from Ms. Ryan.

Q    F.  (Laughter.)

Q    That was quite the sports metaphor --

MR. GIBBS:  I was going to say -- I'm not sure how I pulled out figure skating, but that's --

Q    Figure skating -- (laughter.)

MR. GIBBS:  Wow.  All right.  Try not to turn -- I would -- news reports suggest that there are additional bonuses that the Secretary of Treasury has talked to the CEO about the need to eliminate and change moving forward.

David.

Q    One on AIG, one not.  Do you support -- the administration -- what Andy Cuomo is doing in New York, subpoenaing AIG for a list of the bonuses and who's getting them?  Would you like to see those names at least made public?  And is the administration doing anything of its -- on its own to make that information publically available?

MR. GIBBS:  I've seen reports on what the Attorney General of New York is doing.  I think the specific proposal about names is something that the administration is looking at.  Obviously increased aspects of transparency in this and in other -- in this and other both financial dealings and across government the President is largely supportive of.  I think in the particular instance of the Attorney General, it's something that the administration is looking at.

Q    And on that question of transparency, back in January, Donald Kohn, the Vice Chair of the Fed, was asked if he would say -- if he would identify those banks that had been lent I think between $800 billion and $1.2 trillion from the Fed since September.  He said, no, he wouldn't reveal those names yet.  In the name of transparency, do you think the administration can continue to sit on the names of all those banks that had been lent perhaps over a trillion dollars from the Fed since September?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's let -- David, I think you understand that the Fed is a bit of an independent -- I'm being specifically sarcastic about that -- a bit of an independent agency.

Q    Duly noted.

MR. GIBBS:  I do know -- and I think you all have a copy of the letter that Director Summers sent to Congress regarding the release of the second $350 billion in the Troubled Asset Relief Program -- that an accounting of what new money would be spent would be done in a way that the American people could see and have confidence in.

Q    But this isn't a TARP program; this is something --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me check specifically on what those comments were.  Without getting deep into Fed comments and those comments, I can certainly -- I want to give you a broader answer on what -- where the President is on the specific TARP recommendations that Dr. Summers --

Q    Like Chuck, if I can get a specific answer --

MR. GIBBS:  We'll see if Chuck gets what he wants.  (Laughter.)

Q    Thank you.

MR. GIBBS:  Thanks, guys.

END
3:13 P.M. EDT
#29-03/17/2009
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/20/2009
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
__________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                              March 20, 2009

PRESS BRIEFING
BY
PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room

2:24 P.M. EDT

MR. GIBBS:  Let me start out giving you a little bit of the sense of the week ahead and an announcement on some commencements that the President has accepted for May.

The President will travel to Camp David tomorrow morning and return to Washington mid-morning on Monday.  When he returns he'll have an event here at the White House to discuss innovation, clean energy and his budget.

A couple of events on Tuesday.  The President will meet with Australian Prime Minister Rudd during the day.  And as you all know, later that evening we'll have a news conference in the East Room.

Q    Do you have a time on that?

MR. GIBBS:  Eight p.m., eastern time.

On Wednesday the President will have events at the -- have an event at the White House, as well as deliver remarks to the Senate Democratic Caucus in the afternoon.

Q    He's going there?

MR. GIBBS:  Yes, I believe that -- yes, that's correct.

In the evening he will attend a fundraiser on behalf of the Democratic National Committee.

On Thursday the President will --

Q    Is that open?

MR. GIBBS:  I believe we'll have pool coverage.

On Thursday the President will attend meetings here and have an event at the White House.  And the same for Friday, before traveling to Camp David next Friday evening.  Obviously the focus -- a lot of the focus next week will be the run-up to the budget.

In terms of commencements, on May 13th the President will give the commencement address at Arizona State University.  On May 17th the President will give the commencement address at Notre Dame.  And on May 22nd he will speak to graduates of the U.S. Naval Academy.

All right, let me get slightly more organized.  Yes, ma'am.

Q    Robert, the new CBO numbers out today indicate that the deficit will be much larger than expected and that the White House had anticipated, and that over the course of time it would be 4 to 5 percent of GDP.  So at this point is 4 to 5 percent sustainable?  And does this give the White House an inclination to consider raising taxes or scaling back the agenda?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, the premise by which the President constructed the budget sent to Capitol Hill was, as I've said repeatedly from here, to cut in half the inherited budget deficit over the course of his first term and to make critical investments in health care, energy independence and education reform in order to make critical investments in our long-term economic growth.

None of the numbers today change the President's either objectives or his ability to achieve that deficit reduction.  The main change in the outlook from CBO is a change or a difference in what they see in terms of long-term economic growth largely in the out years of the budget.  The Fed sees in that long-term outlook between 2.5 and 2.7 percent economic growth.  The Blue Chip forecast is 2.6 percent.  And the government's forecast is 2.6 percent.

I believe the average -- I don't have the number in front of me -- the average for CBO is lower, which is why the out year numbers are different; obviously, as you get farther out the numbers change.  But it doesn't change what the President's focus is in terms of his objectives and making critical investments and doesn't change his ability to halve the deficit in four years.

Q    But I go back, is 4 to 5 percent of GDP sustainable?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, you know, I think the President's budget presents a number that is less than that.  Again, there's -- and you all have covered this over the years, the pretty large difference on occasion between CBO and OMB.  I believe that just in looking at the growth numbers in the GDP you have basically a plus or minus $900 billion swing because the numbers at CBO represent about a 50 percent -- there's a 50 percent likelihood that they'll be different, up or down.

So they don't change the President's long-term objectives.  And most importantly, the President has outlined a plan to bring fiscal responsibility and fiscal sustainability to a town that hasn't seen it for quite some time.  The President looks forward to working with members of Congress throughout the next few weeks to get that budget passed in a timely way, make those critical investments and put ourselves on that fiscal responsibility path that will cut the deficit in half in four years.

Yes, ma'am.

Q    Robert, the President has made the latest in a series of public overtures toward Iran, and I would guess that a lot of thought went into the timing and the format for how he did this.  And I'm just wondering if you could maybe go into why it was decided to do it in this way, at this particular time.  And do you expect this effort to show results anytime soon?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me -- obviously the message is -- follows the Persian New Year.  The President believed that the New Year marks -- marked a good time for us to demonstrate the tone for the type of respectful engagement that we believe can be had with the people of Iran.  And we also believe it gives Iran the opportunity for a similar new beginning.  Again -- quote the President's message:  as a way of reaching out to the people, but understanding that there are rights and responsibilities.

In terms of reaction or what we hope to get out of it, I think in many ways that's up to Iran.

Q    So there's an offer on the table for Iran to attend the conference at the end of the month on Afghanistan.  Is it the President's hope that in making this gesture, that that will encourage them to attend that conference?  And is the timing in any way taking that into consideration?

MR. GIBBS:  No, I think the invitation -- that went out previously -- we hope is accepted because the conference is intended to -- the conference is intended to bring about Afghanistan's neighbors in that troubled region of the world.  And obviously Iran is one of those neighbors and we believe, if it wants to, can work constructively with the international community to help the country of Afghanistan.

But again, I think it's important that the President wanted to deliver this unique message directly to the people and to the leaders, to understand that there's a rightful place in the community of nations with -- that there's a rightful place in that community without terror or arms or violence, and that through peaceful actions the two countries can work together toward their mutual ends.

Jake.

Q    Doesn't the fact that the CBO projects an additional $2.3 trillion long-term deficit negate the fact that the President is talking about being able to cut $2 trillion?  I mean, it's basically, there it went and now here's another $300 billion.

MR. GIBBS:  I have not seen the final report -- and I know Director Orszag will have a call, not long after this and he'll have a better sense of some of the numbers in terms of the savings.  But I think, again, the numbers that you're talking about in many ways accumulate, again, farther down the road based on a change in their assumption about long-term economic growth.

But the President remains confident that he has put forward a budget that meets the critical investments that he thinks America must be making in order to move past the bubble-and-bust economic era into some sustained economic growth, while cutting that deficit in half in four years.  The President remains confident that he can do so.

Q    What would your message to the American people be when they hear about the CBO projecting this much larger deficit, $400 billion additional this year, $400 billion next year?  Do you think their numbers are -- I know you cited other numbers that are more optimistic in terms of growth.  Do you think -- do you reject the CBO numbers?

MR. GIBBS:  No, no, I think -- again, I think there are a series of numbers, opinions that range, as I said -- in terms of economic growth, from the Fed to Blue Chip indicators, growth forecasts, to the federal government and to the Congressional Budget Office.

Look, I think what the American people should understand is that for quite some time we have -- we've had budget deficits and an accumulation of budget debt that the President believes is unsustainable; that his budget takes actions to cut the deficit in half in just four years; and believes that the steps that his administration is taking, as it relates to recovery and financial stability, will put us, as well as the investments in the budget, will put us on a more robust and sustained path towards that economic growth that will help the deficit in many of those out years.

Obviously it is exceedingly hard to project seven or 10 years into the future.  But the President remains confident that the forecast, though, demonstrates that he can cut the budget deficit in half by the end of his first term.

Yes, sir.

Q    Robert, every time when the President talks about health care or education, he always frames it as part of -- being part of the economy and the economic recovery and investment in the future.  What does he actually mean by that -- I mean, in terms of, you know, the actual amount of dollars that this will, you know, present to turning the economy around?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, obviously a business's ability to grow is impacted by their health care bill.  And a business's ability to grow is impacted by the growth rate in their health care spending.  A business's ability to grow is in many ways dependent upon having a work force that is well trained and well educated in order to do the jobs of the future that the President hopes to create.  And obviously on energy independence, we all understand what $4-a-gallon gasoline can do to stifle the economic growth of a small business, a large business, or impede the budget of a family of four.

There's no doubt that the budget and the investments contained in the President's budgets are inextricably linked to our long-term economic growth.  We cannot sustain the jobs of the future that help us compete on a global economic stage with countries throughout the world unless we bring our health care costs under control; unless we educate our children for a 21st-century global economy; and if we don't get ourselves out of a cycle of dependence on foreign fuel sources -- that all of those play a huge part in our ability to govern our own path for economic growth.

Q    On Iran, is the videotape sort of the beginning of what this administration hopes will be an ongoing dialogue, and sort of the next step is perhaps a face-to-face meeting -- high-level?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me -- I mean, I think without getting into what next, obviously there's an evaluation overall of our policy as it relates to Iran.  But the President believes that today marked an appropriate time with which to seek a different relationship with a country, if that country is willing to accept responsibilities to become part of a greater community of nations.

Q    But there's a not step two on paper at this point.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, there is, but -- and there are many more, but none of which I'm going to get into today.

Chip.

Q    A pretty tough week for the President this week.  He seemed to be losing the message war almost every day.  It was -- every day he had some economic plan out there, and every day it was AIG, or Geithner, or the comments on Leno.  Are you worried that this may be kind of a watershed week when he's losing control of the message?

MR. GIBBS:  No.  (Laughter.)

Q    Can you elaborate?  How's he going to get back on?  How's he going to get back on track here?

MR. GIBBS:  You know, Chip, I -- I'm going to hesitate to rant on my good friends on cable, which -

Q    I don't watch cable, so -- (laughter.)

Q    Chip doesn't have a TV.  (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS:  Which is ironic.  He has those radios that I was given.

You know, Chip, I think on the -- I think on the President's trip to California, I think there is rightly concern and outrage for the events of the past week, and there's rightly concern and frustration about the economic challenges that this country face.  You heard from teachers that are doing a good job but face the prospect that they won't have their job for the next school year.  You have, I think, all sorts of economic stories that denote the great challenges with which this President was presented when he first walked into this White House.

The President is, as you've heard him say before and you've certainly heard me say before, less interested in the day-to-day score-keeping which has always counted him down and counted him out.

We've been called idiots before.  We understand that.  But the President isn't focused on -- isn't focused on that.  The President is focused on the decisions that he has to make to get the pillars for economic progress in place, whether it's ensuring that the Recovery Act is done in a way that gives people confidence about the money that's being spent to create jobs, and put money back in their pockets; that we're taking steps through the budget to make those critical investments.  The President isn't focused on the ups and downs of day to day score-keeping; he's focused on looking ahead.

Q    So he's not really feeling frustrated that this week the message kept slipping away and getting only chatter.

MR. GIBBS:  I didn't go to California, but it looked like he was having a good time.

Q    On Geithner, is the administration sticking to -- are you sticking to this March 10th date for when he found out about this?  Because I -- he was asked about it in Congress a week before -

Q    It was March 9th.

Q    March 9th.  He was asked a week before, specifically.

MR. GIBBS:  And I think the Treasury Department addressed that in the newspaper this morning.  Look, I think there's -- there has been -- obviously, the Treasury has talked about taking responsibility for knowing more about the timeline.

Q    When Secretary Geithner talked about that yesterday, he really parsed words.  He said, on Tuesday, March 10th, I was informed about the full scale and scope of these specific bonuses.  He's not saying that was the first time he learned about it --

MR. GIBBS:  Well --

Q    A very careful parsing of words here, suggesting he did know about it before then.

MR. GIBBS:  No, I -- I think if you read carefully the report you're discussing, the Treasury Secretary takes responsibility, as the President does --

Q    But he's sticking by that October 10th date -- excuse me, March 10th date --

MR. GIBBS:  Right, I --

Q    -- even though he clearly knew about it before then.  He was asked about it in Congress --

MR. GIBBS:  But, again -- but again, Chip --

Q    -- and he was overseeing the AIG bailout.  I mean, is it --

MR. GIBBS:  What committee --

Q    It just doesn't seem credible.

MR. GIBBS:  That was Ways and Means?

Q    Yes.  But he was specifically asked the question.

MR. GIBBS:  No, I understand.  I understand.  And I think he's addressed that and I think that's addressed in both the reports today and what he said yesterday.  Chip, we're -- we understand and the President shares the outrage and the frustration that everybody has.  The administration is taking steps to recoup money that's gone out, as well as to put in place a financial stability plan and to seek progress on getting our economy moving again.

Q    Let me just ask you specifically.  When he says, on March 10th he was informed about the full scale and scope, is he saying that's the first he learned about it at all?

MR. GIBBS:  Chip, the question is predicated on the report in the paper and I think the report in the paper answers your question.

Q    So he did know about it before then? 20:54

MR. GIBBS:  Chip, I will -- can somebody go get a dollar and buy Chip a newspaper so that he can read the report?  Again, I think it's pretty clear --

Q    Been read.

MR. GIBBS:  Excellent.  Then I believe it's been answered.

Q    Robert, can I follow on that real quick?  Why did you tell us that it was March 10th, then, that you found out?  The statement from the White House was very specific, he found out March 10th.

MR. GIBBS:  Again, I would point you to the report that the Secretary of the Treasury takes responsibility, as does the administration, with knowledge about the structure and the scope of those bonuses.

Q    But we were accidentally or however misinformed about the day that he found out.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's -- let's not -- I'm just going to leave it at that.  I think the report is pretty clear and so are the answers.

Chuck.

Q    Did he misinform the White House about when he found out?

MR. GIBBS:  Chuck.

Q    Well, I do watch cable TV and apparently Congresswoman Maxine Waters had a question.  I'll let you answer her question:  What took place between Treasury and Senator Dodd?  What do you guys now know that took place between Treasury and Senator Dodd?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I would point you to exactly what the Treasury Secretary said on CNN yesterday -- that the Treasury Department had concerns about lawsuits involved in the provisions.  The provision that ultimately passed provides a clawback and recoupment look to bonuses through the TARP, at the discretion of an investigation by the Secretary of the Treasury.

Again, I think that the Treasury Secretary has answered this and has the confidence of the President.

Q    Do you feel like her criticism is sort of a -- she needs to (inaudible) interview, or --

MR. GIBBS:  I would point you to that interview, and --

Q    I'm not asking -- her questions, so that means you want to --

MR. GIBBS:  I appreciate that you're now doing this on behalf of members of Congress.  (Laughter.)

Q    She seemed to be concerned.  Let me follow-up on something that the President said last night.  He said -- he talked about this issue of the bonuses, that they were looking at it from a legal term, but that Treasury wasn't looking at it from a moral or ethical sort of -- sort of through a moral or ethical -- didn't get the exact quote -- from a moral and ethical aspect.  So does the President believe Treasury was wrong not to think about the moral and ethical consequences?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, Chuck, I would -- I think the President would say that to everybody involved.  I think the President would say that you have a financial company that entered into contracts in April of 2008 that also didn't understand, as taxpayers have been outraged, as he's been outraged, about the lack of common sense and the sheer breadth of -- the sheer breadth of understanding that bonuses generally reward success, not failure; that the --

Q    Does the President believe he can legislate this compensation issue, or that ultimately --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me finish this -- the President understands that, again, the frustration of the American taxpayer, as we watch the fact that we have -- as he said on "The Tonight Show," that there's -- that executive compensation and bonuses and the thinking around a lot of that over the past few years has gotten wildly out of control.

Q    Does he think he can legislate it?

MR. GIBBS:  Executive compensation?

Q    Yes.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think, you know, you stood here in this room and heard the President in the Oval Office talk quite clearly and convincingly about proposals that were the strongest in American history to put limits on executive compensation for firms that are receiving extraordinary assistance under the Troubled Asset Relief Program.

Q    But he seemed to talk about the whole moral climate, but outside of this, does he think out -- companies outside the TARP --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, absolutely.  Absolutely.  The President in his -- has long been a supporter of, and has contained in this proposal that shareholders should have a non-binding vote that through the power of their opinion can demonstrate for whatever company they're a shareholder in that the compensation that's involved matches the success of the company, the success for shareholders, and that all of this has to be in some line with reasonable expectations.

You know, study after study denotes the huge increases in where we were just a few decades ago with what a worker made in relation to a CEO and where we are now.  Obviously we have seen outsized compensation and bonuses and salaries that have long gotten out of whack.

Mark.

Q    On a related issue, Robert, does President Obama believe that the bill passed by the House yesterday to tax the bonus money is constitutional?

MR. GIBBS:  I have not asked the President about the constitutionality of the bill.  I read in the papers that some experts believe the bill to be constitutional.  I don't know that -- I don't know that constitutionality has specifically been looked at here.  I know that the White House is evaluating legislation from the House and whatever legislation might come from the Senate in order to look at two objectives.

The first is understanding that taxpayer anger and frustration that I talked about with Chuck -- understanding, as the President has talked about, that the way this system has gotten completely out of whack; that it lacks common sense; that we are rewarding not success but in some ways failure.

But also looking at whatever legislation comes out of this process to ensure that our ability to stabilize the financial system and ensure that credit flows from banks and lending institutions to families and small businesses and big businesses through capital and what they need to run their business.

So there's -- there is the dual objective that the White House will evaluate.

Q    Well, if the House bill were to reach his desk, would he sign it?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, that's the evaluation that is being undertaken here.  I do believe the President and the White House have concern -- we have to ensure, again, that both of these objectives are met; that the frustration -- the real frustration that taxpayers and the President have about the situation that we've seen with AIG, but also ensure, for instance, that a community bank that took some TARP funding, not because it was necessarily in trouble, but because we all understand that additional capital through something like that can help their balance sheets, and that families and small businesses can see the return of flow of capital to ensure that there is enough for housing loans and auto loans and college loans, and that all of that will be evaluated throughout the process when a bill gets to his desk.

Ed.

Q    Robert, how concerned is the White House that the new deficit numbers today might further erode support on Capitol Hill for the budget, for the President's other initiatives?

MR. GIBBS:  You know, obviously, again, the President shares the frustration of many about where we've gone relating to fiscal irresponsibility over the past several years.  That's why not only did he present a budget that accomplishes the goal of cutting the deficit in half in his first term, but does so in an honest and transparent way so that we begin accounting for our efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan, disasters that we know -- natural disasters that we know will occur.

But the President remains confident that we can pass the budget that he sent up, making the critical investments that we need, and that we'll have success not just on this but on other legislative initiatives this year.

Q    You don't expect much erosion in support?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, we're -- we want to work with both sides of the aisle to ensure that the President's budget of fiscal responsibility and critical investment moves forward, and we think we can do that.

Major.

Q    Robert, whether it's been a good week or a bad week, it appears there is some evidence -- at least in the minds of Democrats, maybe just a small number on Capitol Hill -- for the first time, the confidence and credibility of this administration is at least open to question.  Maxine Waters said this morning on the radio about this Geithner-AIG issue, "Maybe the President is not up to speed on what is going on.  I think this is all going to have to be clarified."  To what degree do you agree with that assessment from Congresswoman Waters?

MR. GIBBS:  I think I answered that with Chuck.  I think what the Secretary of Treasury has talked about over the past few days is quite clear.

Q    That's all the clarification the nation requires?

MR. GIBBS:  No, I -- well, I think we -- I think what the Secretary of Treasury talked about demonstrates actions that were taken, concerns that were expressed, and I would point her to those comments.

Q    Actions that were taken when?  I mean, the country seems to be trying to still figure out, and to a certain degree the Treasury Department is still trying to figure out, exactly when the Treasury Secretary became aware of this:  Asked about it March 30th in congressional testimony; representations here by senior officials and he was first informed of it on March 10th.  I mean, it seems you can't even get the sequence properly aligned.  How can the country then digest whether the policy responses were correct if we can't even get a firm grasp on when knowledge was obtained and when actions were taken?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, Major, I don't want to repeat the answers I've given, I think, to both of those questions from Chip and Chuck.  But I'd point you to those reports and those answers.

Q    On the budget, is it the administration's point of view that this is essentially a disagreement between economists; it's kind of a rounding error as far as economic projections are concerned over the next 10 years?  And though $2 trillion sounds like a lot of money, Americans, seeing it on their front pages of the newspapers tomorrow, hearing it as they drive home, shouldn't be alarmed that the deficit is higher than $2 trillion, or -- what's --

MR. GIBBS:  No, let me --

Q    What's the takeaway that -- people will hear this number, and they'll say, whoa, $2 trillion, that sounds like a lot of money to me.

MR. GIBBS:  I can assure people it is.  I can also assure people of this -- that the President has a budget that institutes, for the first time in quite some time, a return to a sane fiscal path that cuts the budget deficit in half during his first term; that puts us back on a framework of an honest budget where we actually begin to pay for our international and domestic endeavors.

Again -- and I think that --

Q    Economists are bound to go by these numbers.

MR. GIBBS:  I understand.  I think that the way I would characterize the differences is the way I characterized them earlier, which was there are differences of opinion between where the Fed believes economic growth will be, where blue-chip economic forecasts are, and where we are in one package and where the CBO is in another.  But again --

Q    But by the Budget Act, they have to go by the CBO numbers.

MR. GIBBS:  I understand.

Q    So you -- you push your agenda through that set of numbers.

MR. GIBBS:  And I think those numbers will validate the objectives that the President outlined at the beginning of this discussion.  I think that's what is important -- again, a decent amount of this growth -- a decent amount of this growth is in the back-year numbers six through 10.  You know, it's a little bit I guess like predicting the winner of your NCAA bracket in six years.  You can certainly distribute sheets, we might all give you $5, but some of the teams you have in there may not actually make the tournament.  I'm extending my sports analogy for yet another important fiscal issue.  (Laughter.)

Helene.

Q    Does the administration think that its own officials who -- like Jack Lew and Mike Froman, who received executive bonuses last year for companies or institutions that helped lead to this economic downturn -- should give their bonuses back?  Do you want to set an example?

MR. GIBBS:  I don't have information in front of me on that.

Q    So you don't think the --

MR. GIBBS:  I'd have to look at the information that -- what they are and I'd be happy to take a look at that in a second.

Q    Okay.  Can we -- so can we get something back on that?  I'd like to also ask you about --

MR. GIBBS:  I think your paper already has that in to us.

Q    I'd also like to you about Iran.  Did Israel inform the administration that Shimon Perez would be giving out a similar Nowruz message to the Iranian people at the same time the Obama administration was?

MR. GIBBS:  Did Israel inform us or did --

Q    Yes.

MR. GIBBS:  I'd have to check.  I know we notified allies about our message last evening, but I do not know what specific things we might have gotten back from others.

Yes, sir.

Q    Back to the budget briefly.  I understand what you're saying about the out years being hard to predict and future NCAA brackets and all that, but the difference next year -- the current -- the budget that's on Capitol Hill, there's a difference between $1.17 trillion under your numbers and $1.4 trillion.  So that's, you know, more than $200 billion, $250 billion, I think -- a big difference right there.  I mean, is this the CBO's way of saying it's the return of the rosy scenario; that your numbers are --

MR. GIBBS:  No, again, I -- again, only if you assume that the Fed, the blue-chip forecasts, and us are all involved in the same rosy scenario cahoots, which I don't think obviously is the case.  I think the economic estimations that we've made that govern the choices of our budget demonstrate quite frankly that we're comfortably in the mainstream of exactly what those forecasts are.

But, you know, let's extend not just one year, but let's extend to that fourth year and I think you'll see that the -- what the President said originally, that our budget -- the budget that he's presented will cut the deficit in half in four years, is true.

But again, the President has made some tough choices about how to put ourselves back on a path towards fiscal sustainability.  And certainly the American people understand that it's going to take a while to do that.  The President took specific actions earlier in the year to ensure that we had a recovery and reinvestment plan that we think will grow the economy, which ultimately will help both in the short term and in the long term with growth and ultimately the projected budget deficit.

Q    If Congress does, as pointed out, stick with the CBO numbers and makes changes to the budget, is that -- are those numbers things that the President is going to be able to live with?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, the President believes that, and looks forward to working with Congress to create and pass a budget that accomplishes his two main priorities -- making the critical investments that we have to in cutting the costs for health care, for putting us on a sustainable path towards energy independence and reforming the way our children are educated; at the same time, cutting the budget deficit in half over those four years from what he inherited. 

The President looks forward to working with members of Congress to ensure both of -- both of those outcomes.

Yes, sir.

Q    Secretary Duncan said this week, "We're going to reward those states and those districts that are willing to challenge the status quo and get dramatically better."  In line with the President's comprehensive education agenda, what national benchmarks are being set by the President and the White House to measure progress, specifically with respect to college accessibility and the rising high school dropout rate?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, obviously, I would point you to Arne in terms of what changes or what adoptions of specific national standards that he's going to use to evaluate this.  Obviously you've heard the President talk about -- and contained in both the recovery and in the budget are changes in tax cuts for college tuition and an increase in Pell grant funding for individuals.

And obviously the President has talked about, in both his address to Congress and in the larger address to the Hispanic Chamber a few weeks ago, specific ideas on reform, both in -- in the classroom and in changes not just to college accessibility that you mentioned, but efforts to stem the rising tide of high school dropouts so that we can educate the workforce that we need for the jobs the President is looking to create for this country.

I think both the recovery plan and the budget take important steps in ensuring that we are moving towards education reform so that our children are prepared.

Q    Just a quick follow-up.  The $5,500, roughly, Pell grant that has been proposed, the expanded one, does the President feel that's adequate, and would he propose expanding of Pell grants, specifically for students who are interested in service-oriented work?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the President has talked about and I think Congress is working on national service legislation.  The President talked about that throughout the campaign.

Look, the Pell grant has, for a long, long time, failed to keep up with, in any moderate way, with the rapid growth in college tuition.  The very first piece of legislation the President introduced as a member of the Senate was a bill to change and increase the amount of money for Pell grants, because many years ago a Pell grant would pay for, for somebody, their entire education for a year, rather than now paying for just a small sliver of their tuition, because we've seen -- we've seen the cost of college tuition skyrocket on the same frame that we've seen the costs of health care.

Michael.

Q    Does the President agree with Chairman Bernanke that it's important not to grow the debt-to-GDP ratio for the medium term?  That the deficit should not be larger than the growth of GDP for the medium term, once we get out of this --

MR. GIBBS:  I have not seen what Chairman Bernanke said or -- I don't have in front of me comparison of those figures.

Again, the President in outlining his budget took steps to ensure that where we are today in the budget deficit that the President inherited, I think the ratio is about 10 percent of GDP.  And obviously that is a number that is certainly not sustainable.  But the President -- that's why the President made some tough choices, certainly, to bring that number down over the course of cutting the deficit in half in four years.

Q    But that seems to be the headline of the CBO today, is that they have the deficit larger than growth of GDP in that middle term, you know, after we get out of this current rut we're in; they still have the deficit as larger --

MR. GIBBS:  I have not -- I have not read the full report before coming out here.  But pose that question to Peter, because he's got a pocket calculator that does all that.  (Laughter.)

Kirk.

Q    Robert, two things.  One -- two unrelated things.  On health care reform, the President and everybody in the administration practically has stressed the importance of it.  Why then is the administration deferring so much to Capitol Hill to draft it?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, Kirk, I think you saw an effort by the President a few weeks ago to bring not just the members and players that will be heavily involved in this process from Capitol -- from Capitol Hill to the White House, but also members of -- that represent doctors and pharmaceutical companies, business, labor -- all of the players involved, to have the beginning discussion on a health care reform plan that will cut costs for the American people.

This isn't going to be done by any one person or any one group of people.  Obviously health care reform and the health care -- health care at large is such a huge entity that all of the players that I just mentioned are going to have to be involved, whether they're in Congress, whether they're in the White House, whether they represent constituencies that will be affected.  But obviously the White House is going to play a role in that, Congress is going to play a role in that, business -- all these entities will play a role in that.  I think the President believes that, as he stated numerous times throughout the campaign, that we have to bring -- in order to reach that consensus, we're going to have to bring all of those groups and parties together to have this discussion and work out a health care reform plan that makes sense.  And I think that's the process.

Q    I have one last question.  Has the White House consistently underestimated the level of public outrage, whether it's about failure to pay taxes by some of your nominees or the bonuses now to some of the companies on Wall Street?

MR. GIBBS:  No, I would reject that characterization uniformly.  I think you've seen the President just this week express outrage.  I think you've seen the President do more than just express outrage about executive compensation and bonuses and take crucial and important steps in order to limit that in a historical way. 

I think the President understands -- and I think that's one of the reasons he is the President -- that he understands the outrage of what's happening -- what's happened inside Washington and how that is viewed outside of Washington.  But I think the President understands that and is taking steps to ensure that as we go forward that we're not doing things the same old way.

Q    Thanks, Robert.

MR. GIBBS:  April.

Q    Robert, real fast.  How did the President enjoy and how did he feel about Jay Leno last night

MR. GIBBS:  He seemed to have a good time.  They got back a bit late.  Look, I think the -- you know, many people in this room lauded the campaign for its ability to reach out and talk to people in society that may have been disaffected or that weren't participating and be able to reach them about their causes and their concerns, and most importantly, to give them a sense and an idea of the solutions and the path that he thought this country should be on to address those challenges.

I think last night was something very similar to that, and I think the message that we released overnight to the people of Iran was also an extension of communicating with people where they are about their cares and concerns and taking -- making sure that people understood where we want to go and the ideas and the solutions that we have.

Q    And is the President going to take the advice, after understanding the gravity of what he said about the issue of Special Olympics, is he going to take the advice to hire someone from the Special Olympics, to bring them here to work here?

MR. GIBBS:  I have not seen that.  I know that the President believes that the Special Olympics are a triumph of the human spirit, and I think he understands that they deserve a lot better than -- than the thoughtless joke that he made last night, and he apologizes for that.  Thanks, guys.

Q    Have a nice weekend, sir.

MR. GIBBS:  You, too.

END
3:12 P.M. EDT
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs,3/23/09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
__________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                              March 23, 2009
PRESS BRIEFING 
      BY
PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
 
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
 
2:33 P.M. EDT
MR. GIBBS:  How is everyone?  My only announcement is I endeavor to make this briefing
shorter than this weekend’s Gridiron dinner.  (Laughter.)  But other than that -- Ms. Loven.
Q    Thank you.  Can you talk a little bit about the bank rescue program –- go ahead.
MR. GIBBS:  I'm just trying to get the podium -- go ahead, sorry.
Q    Talk a little bit about the bank rescue program.  I know that the --
(Interruption as podium rises.)  (Laughter.)
Q    Okay, bank rescue -- serious, somber.  Leverage, lifting out the money, you’re still
only going to get out, as I understand it, between $500 billion and a trillion of these bad
assets, which is about either a quarter or a half -- depending on what it gets to -– of what
people think is the amount on the books.  What is the –- how is that effective?
MR. GIBBS:  But I think –- let’s understand before we surmise what that number could be, to
understand that one of the things the health assessments on the banks will do is give a
greater understanding of exactly what that is.  I do think what Secretary Geithner laid out
today, though, will –- using both public and private money in order to clear from the
balance sheets of these banks toxic or legacy assets is a plan that will get the economy
moving and get credit flowing.
Q    That's my question – how do you know it’s going to get the economy moving?  If you're
only getting at what some say -- as I said again -- either a quarter or half of --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again -- I guess I don’t want to buy into the premise that --
Q    -- the bad assets and you don’t even know – if you you're saying you don't even know
how much is on their books, then why even go ahead with the plan now?
MR. GIBBS:  Because you guys keep asking for it.  (Laughter.)  No, again, look, I think it’s
safe to say that these troubled assets are there and Secretary Geithner and the President
are taking strong action through this plan to get them off the balance sheets and to get
credit moving again.  I think that obviously this is a plan that balances public and private
risk.  It allows the market to set the rate so that the government doesn't overpay for assets.
And we're confident that, as the President said, that this will take steps in the right
direction in order to remove these from balance sheets and get credit flowing again -- loans
that will go to small businesses and families, big businesses alike -- I think is a strong steps in
the right direction.
In terms of the size and the amount, obviously this is a bid use $75 to $100 billion worth
of TARP money to leverage a much larger pool of capital to do this, and I think it's -- it's
a strong step in the right direction.  I would point out, as -- this is one of many steps
that the economic team and the Obama administration have taken since coming to office.  This
is yet another facet to this -- the challenges that the economy has faced just through
financial stability, leaving aside the President's strong desire to have an Economic
Recovery and Reinvestment Plan that will create jobs and get the economy moving again.
But this is another step in terms of unfreezing credit markets, dealing with home prices and
home foreclosures.  Obviously the remaining step, through the health assessments, is to
determine what capital banks might need under a worst case scenario.
So I think, again, it's a positive step in the right direction and one of many steps that
we're taking under -- under this administration to get the economy moving again.
Yes, sir.
Q    Nobel Prize-winning economist Paul Krugman has said this toxic debt plan is almost
certain to fail.  He's called it a rehash, a recycling of a cash-for-trash plan that was
abandoned -- that was proposed and then abandoned by the Bush administration in the fall. 
Any response to that?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, look, I -- without responding I guess directly to that, I think
what -- look, the alternative to a plan that manages risk and reward and doesn't have the
taxpayers shouldering 100 percent of the burden is to do exactly that and shoulder the whole
thing.
I also think that if you look at -- as I said a minute ago, I think this is a system that
also takes into account having market help in determining the price of -- the price of some
of these troubled assets to ensure that the government doesn't overpay.
And, look, I think some of Mr. Krugman's argument is also -- in some ways deals with a
different aspect of the plan, and that's bank capitalization.  I think -- I don't think
anybody that reads anything about these plans should misunderstand that there is another
step in terms of the health assessments, as I said, of these banks in order to determine,
through public or private means, whether additional capital is needed in order to survive
under the worst case scenario of an even more severe recession than we're experiencing right
now.
But the President and the team are confident that the plan as outlined will take crucial
steps in freeing up credit and getting the economy moving again.
Q    But how do you reassure private investors who might invest in this plan that they might
not -- that they wouldn't be subject to the same kind of push-back on, say, executive
bonuses that AIG is facing, since in fact the investors in this plan would be receiving
discounted taxpayer -- discounted investments?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, I mean, I think this obviously is a -- this is a different program
than what was set up under or what exists under TARP.  Obviously there's a line that has to
be walked in understanding that the public and the taxpayers shouldn't and don't want to
shoulder a hundred percent of the risk.  But I think the balance that's struck here in
sharing that risk and spreading the reward is one that is able to navigate that.
Chip.
Q    Speaking of navigating, introducing this plan puts you in between Wall Street
executives who are skeptical because of the precise point that was just made, that there
might be some sort of populist backlash, and legislation trying to clawback something from
earnings that they make from this, and populist rage on Capitol Hill.  What have you done --
or the administration, what has the administration done to reach out to both sides to make
sure that this works?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, obviously, this is a result of extensive discussions with both Capitol
Hill and people both on Wall Street and involved in the market in order to set up a plan
that we think will best achieve the objective of freeing up capital.  Look, I think whether
-- I mean, I think the President spoke clearly about this over the weekend in the interview
that he did with "60 Minutes," in understanding that we -- taxpayers are very much correct
that we have to understand and deal with excessive compensation and bonuses.  And the
President has outlined a plan to start on that, so that bonuses aren't a way of rewarding
people that are not succeeding; bonuses have typically been something that's given to people
that are doing well.  But also we have to take steps to ensure that whatever is done, is
done in a way that furthers our recovery and stabilizes our financial system.  And look,
it's something that the President is aware of.
In all honestly, Jake, I don't -- I think this is -- this has not been a -- this is not a
new tension.  I think this tension has been certainly prevalent if not completely, if it had
lacked -- even if it lacked obviousness, in all honesty, for a long, long time, even dating
back to the -- before the middle of September of last year when bailouts became a word that
more Americans were hearing --
Q    But it's peaking a bit, I mean, in terms of Wall Street skepticism and also populism on
the Hill.  I'm just wondering if you could be a little bit more specific about what specific
outreach you've done.  Did the President, once the plan was in place, did he call bicameral,
bipartisan leadership in the Hill and brief them?  Did Geithner go to Wall Street and talk
to people there and talk to CEOs?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I know -- I know that Secretary Geithner is in New York tonight, obviously
speaking, and I'm sure that will involve an audience that includes both CEOs and bankers.  I
can certainly check.  I don't have in front of me what the -- whether or not the President
talked to -- explicitly to Capitol Hill about this.
But look, I think that is -- that's something the President understands, that tension.  And
I think the steps that he has taken and will take underscore the notion that we have to deal
with what are sometimes forces that are pulling in opposite directions.  I think it
underscores the necessity of working to try to get it right, and not lurching in any one
direction but navigating opposite forces in order to do what's right for the economy.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, in rolling out the details today, Timothy Geithner used a more, sort of, quiet
approach -- pen-and-pad with reporters, not getting out there on television in a very public
way.  Why?
MR. GIBBS:  You guys always -- every time we do one of these things, we do a background
briefing, and somebody asks if it can be on the record --
Q    But this was a major --
MR. GIBBS:   -- and, you know, we don't want just a speech, we'd like to do some Q&A, and so
we put the Secretary of Treasury out on the record to --
Q    This was a major event.  Everyone was waiting for the details, and it almost seemed
like it came out in a less than, sort of, bombastic way.
MR. GIBBS:  I guess he's worried a little bit less about what the packaging is on the
present, and more importantly, what’s inside of the box.  I suppose we could have rigged out
some flags and printed up some placards and cued up some old campaign music, but I think
what’s important -- maybe not for Washington reporters, but what’s more important for the
American people is to get the details of a plan that works to get their bank lending money
again.
I think that's, in all honesty, what the Americans people care most about.  I think if you
objectively look at what this administration has done, or what the economic team has done in
the course of about nine weeks of service, I think you’d be hard-pressed to find nine weeks
where more solutions were outlined of problems and challenges that have been facing this
country probably since the 1930s.
Q    Just to follow another question –- Christina Romer, in  an interview with CNN earlier
today, talked about how if this doesn’t work that we’ll review it – we’ll tweak it, I think
was the exact language that she used.  Is there a backup plan if this doesn’t work?  And to
say "tweak" it, does that sort of instill sort of a lack of confidence that this will
actually work?
MR. GIBBS:  Do we have a backup plan if it doesn’t work, and if we do have a backup plan,
does that denote that we're preparing for it not to work?  I want to sift through the
circular --
Q    I asked a backup plan because she said if it doesn’t work we'll "tweak" it.  But I'm
just wondering, does that give a sense of --
MR. GIBBS:  Again, I think it is safe to assume that any policy that this administration or
-- I'll speak broadly for any politician in the country -- if they roll out a plan, it’s
constantly evaluated to ensure that the objectives by which the plan was introduced are met
by the implementation of the plan.  And if the plan doesn’t meet through its implementation
the objectives of what it was outlined to do, that that plan might be augmented to meet
those objectives.
Q    That was deep.  That was deep.
MR. GIBBS:  That was more this than that.  (Laughter.)
Yes, sir.
Q    On pricing, what makes you confident that they will be able to find prices here that
private investors are attracted to, and what happens if they don't?  Does this thing just
fail?
MR. GIBBS:  No, I think -- and obviously -- and I think Secretary Geithner talked about this
this morning -- but, look, you have competing interests and putting these two competing
interests together gives each involved an incentive to find a way to do business that
ultimately works for the American people.
Obviously we've talked a lot about the need -- in this room -- for banks to have bad assets
off of their balance sheets.  So that gives somebody the incentive to figure out how to do
that in a way that makes sense for them and still provides them that belief.  Obviously
having a public-private partnership also gives both taxpayers and private investors that
have the wherewithal to deal with a lot of this stuff -- gives them the incentive to look
for something that makes sense for them and for the taxpayer.
So I think you’ve created basically a supply-and-demand type auction that allows people to
get what they need.  That market, through that supply-and-demand model, can set a price that
allows each objective to be met.  And I think obviously -- I think there’s a tremendous
incentive for banks to want to take advantage of an opportunity that allows them to get past
some of these bad assets.
Q    Will it simply be a free market out there for pricing these assets, or is the
government going to be in there at some point almost as an arbitrator trying to push the two
sides together?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think it’s probably a little early to talk about that.  I know there are
people that are interested in the program, as was denoted in the morning papers.  And I
think that whenever you have willing buyers and willing sellers, the market can help
instructively set a price that works for both entities and, in this case, something that
will protect the taxpayers.  You won’t find the pressure of the government alone shouldering
all of the risk and the burden, willing ultimately to pay much more than an asset might be
worth.
Chuck.
Q    Robert, can you give us sort of a little bit of a scorecard for the public?  So when
are the first purchases?  When should we expect to start seeing the first purchases?
MR. GIBBS:  I think Secretary Geithner did not necessarily give a date, but said that --
obviously and this is -- they've had discussions obviously with the Fed and FDIC about
setting up this structure.  Obviously the FDIC has some experience in this, as well as the
ability for each in terms of their role in the financing.  So I think this is something that
people will see quite soon.
Q    Who's going to run the public investment corporation?  Is there going to be one person
who is going to be like, sort of, a CEO or a manager?
MR. GIBBS:  I would point to -- Treasury might have a more specific answer, if there's one
person that does it.
Q    And finally, are you comfortable that there is a -- that this is democratized?  So, for
instance, that it -- it does seem like this is geared toward getting people with a lot of
money, but there isn't a component for Joe in Kansas City, you know, or Jane in Des Moines.
MR. GIBBS:  Do you know a Joe in Kansas City?  Like, every example is some Joe in Kansas
City.  (Laughter.)
Q    What's wrong with Kansas City?  (Laughter.)
Q    The plumber --
Q    Robert, we're on a --
MR. GIBBS:  Look at me, you don't think I like Kansas City?  (Laughter.)
Q    It is a (inaudible) meat shop.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  Right.
Q    And the poor Royals franchise.
MR. GIBBS:  There you go.  (Laughter.)
Q    But in all seriousness, that they -- that there does seem to be a -- where there wasn't
an ask of the American public to sort of get involved in this or -- do you feel like there's
enough of a way for average citizens to participate in this?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, I think -- yes, I think, obviously through investments and obviously
-- look, the taxpayers will share in the reward for assets that do.
Q    Well, right now it's hedge fund guys and pensions plans -- sort of like this --
MR. GIBBS:  Well --
Q    -- you know, the same Wall Street that everybody has been beating up on.  Is there --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, but, I mean --
Q    Do you feel like you --
MR. GIBBS:  Do I think -- you know, we've talked a lot about pension funds and what's
happened to them over the course of the last few months.  I think obviously them being
involved does give Joe in Kansas City the ability, through an investment in his pension
fund, to do well.
Jonathon.
Q    You got a couple of big things happening on Capitol Hill this week.  First, if the
Senate moves forward with its -- toward its bonus legislation -- there was a sense at the
end of last week that what happened to Chris Dodd nobody wants happening to them.  And they
felt like, you know, if they did anything that would look like watering down a bonus bill,
they would be excoriated and that the White House or the administration would not bail them
out; that there was a sense that Dodd kind of twisted in the wind until Thursday, when
finally Tim Geithner said, yes, it was us that asked for that change.
I'm wondering, first, are you guys sensing that -- that you have dance partners on Capitol
Hill to deal with some of the issues you've raised about these bonus legislations?
MR. GIBBS:  I'm don't --
Q    Do you feel -- are there Senators there who are willing to talk to you about your
concerns that some of this legislation may be going too far?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I think what the White House would communicate to Capitol Hill, to
any member, to both sides, is exactly, again, what the President talked about -- how he
would ultimately evaluate any legislation, which I had repeated earlier, which is to
understand that we cannot and should not reward failure with bonuses, and the message that
would send, but also to make sure that we don't do harm to the financial system.
Q    And are you finding a receptive audience?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't know if they just heard what I said, but I hope it was received well.
Q    Okay.  Second, the budget bills are going to be rolled out this week, as well.  And I
wonder if now you can talk about how appropriate you feel it would be to do a national
health plan with reconciliation language so that it couldn't filibustered.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, I think the debate on reconciliation is months and months and months
ahead of itself.  I think if anybody is concerned about how this is going to be resolved,
the best way is the exact way the President answered a question, I think, to a Republican
member of Congress at the first event we had here where the President took questions.  And
that is, the best way to resolve the rising cost of health care is to have entities from all
sides come together to find a solution.  That's what -- that's the priority of this
administration and certainly of this President.
I think the notion that something that might happen in August and September, when it's still
chilly outside and we're only in late March, I think gives a lot of short shrift to the
notion that people in this town ought to be able to work together to find solutions to some
of our biggest problems.
Q    But on that, what some Republicans -- Judd Gregg, for instance -- are saying that if
you have reconciliation language in these budgets on health care, then the liberals who will
be pushing one agenda on health care will know that they have the upper hand, because if you
fail to get some bipartisan deal, then always fall back and --
MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- two points on that.  One is, I think that gives, again, short shrift
to the notion that people should have good ideas about a problem we've talked about for
several decades; there isn't a lack of good ideas out there.  And the second thing I might
mention is it is interesting to see the views on reconciliation and how they've changed
since, say, the Bush tax cuts in 2001.
Mark.
Q    Robert, can you say definitively now that the President won't sign the House-passed
bonus tax bill?
MR. GIBBS:  Again, I would repeat exactly what he said last night, which is --
Q    Well, he declined to embrace it, certainly.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, he -- I guess the -- well, let me tell you what I heard, and we can argue
about that.  Again, the President, I believe, said that the bill would be evaluated again on
the two pillars with which I talked about.  And, you know, I think to get ahead of where
anybody else is in understanding that the process will go through the Senate, and we will
certainly evaluate whatever were to come down Pennsylvania Avenue.
Q    And on a related issue, do you feel or does the President feel that the American people
are beginning to suffer from bailout fatigue, with all of the bailouts going on, and today
you announced yet another new bailout program for the toxic assets?  How do you go about
dealing with that?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, I think the American people very much lament, as does the President
and everyone in his administration, that we find ourselves at the point today that we do,
because of any number of factors that have led up to this point that find ourselves facing a
declining jobs market, a home foreclosure crisis, a financial stability crisis, a lack of
appropriate regulation in the market that matches where we are and the advanced technical
nature of our financial system.
But I think the American people as -- again, as the President said last night, I think he
wants the American people to understand that the steps that he's outlining and that we're
taking today will help free up money in the system so that they can borrow money again, so
that their small business that has a spotless credit rating isn't hounded to get money every
two weeks from a bank because -- not of their doing but of something in the larger financial
system; or that if -- again, if they've got a good credit history but can't find a willing
bank to borrow money to send their child to college, that the steps that are being taken,
and I explained a little bit of this, obviously there is -- there can be a tension between
Wall Street and Main Street, but I think the President was clear that we're all in this boat
together and that the only way that we're going to get this economy moving again is to do a
series of things:  invest in the recovery; reregulate our financial industry; deal with home
foreclosures; but also stabilize our financial system -- that all of these have to be done
together.
Look, the truth is, Mark, that today's announcement alone is not going to fix our economy,
just as any individual piece of this taken in only itself isn't going to alone fix the
economy.  But all these things together can help what ails the system, free up credit,
create jobs, put money back in people's pockets, and get the economy moving again.
Q    At enormous expense.
MR. GIBBS:  At an enormous expense that the President believes should be done in a more
transparent way so that the benefits can be recouped by the taxpayers and that our economy
can get growing again.
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, back to the bonus legislation, does the President or the White House have some
suggested language for the Senate to consider?
MR. GIBBS:  Not that I'm aware of, no.
Q    Are you leaving hands off, letting them work their will upon it?
MR. GIBBS:  I can certainly check and see if there's any updates to a legislative strategy.
Q    Are you going to jump into it at the House-Senate conference committee?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, you're ahead of the process by at least a good step.  So --
Q    I don't hear you saying that you're going to guide the Senate or offer them some
language, so I assume --
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I'd check on the update of where we are and tell you the way the
President would evaluate legislation that might come out of something like a conference
committee.
Q    And one other thing.  Is there any financial regulatory package coming this week?
MR. GIBBS:  I believe Secretary Geithner will testify Thursday -- I'm not sure if it's on
the House or the Senate side -- and begin to outline principles for regulatory reform that
we hope will pass by the end of the year.  And obviously you know that this will be a big
topic in a week or so, when we go to London.
Q    He's going to roll it out at the hearing?
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, sir.
Yes, ma'am.
Q    What does the President think of the formation of this group of moderates?  Is it
designed to sabotage his agenda by Democrats?
MR. GIBBS:  No.  Look -- no, I think for a long time we've had groups of like-minded
legislators that have banded together to make -- and embrace policy prescriptions that they
think are the best way to solve the challenges that we face.
I think he looks forward to working with anybody in the Senate not constrained by their
membership in one area or constrained by any label.
Q    Well, isn't it premature to try to undermine these programs?
MR. GIBBS:  I don't think the assembling of a group of moderate either Democrats or
Republicans the President certainly wouldn’t see as undermining his agenda.  I think in many
ways seeking solutions to these challenges is something the President would hope everyone
does and it wouldn’t provide any impediment to what he’s trying to do.
Major.
Q    Robert, one on the FDIC and one on executive compensation.  Obviously Treasury and the
Fed are part of this, the private investors are, but the largest component of this credit
system to absorb the toxic assets is the FDIC.  And most Americans who think about that as
thinking about the guarantor of their own savings accounts.  What can you say to those
Americans who might hear this and understand that the FDIC is going to be the biggest player
in this to ensure that their confidence in their own savings remains valid and what steps
the administration is going to take to make sure the FDIC can not only do this task, but its
central task, which is protecting depositors?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think you can -- I think the American people can reasonably be assured
that we wouldn’t be taking steps forward with the chair of the FDIC if both the President
and the FDIC weren’t very assured that this was the right step to take and that the function
that they have performed for a long, long time would in any way be undermined.
And I think Secretary Geithner was asked this question at his briefing this morning, as
well, and I think the notion that -- he reassured those that the FDIC can do, as you
mentioned, the primary function that most Americans would associate with it, as well as
their ability to take on an additional role and shoulder a burden for the taxpayers.
Q    On executive compensation, there were some reports this weekend that the administration
is open to limits on executive compensation for publicly traded companies that have nothing
to do with TARP, that aren’t asking for any government financing for anything.  Is that
true, number one?  And number two, if you are a buyer into this program, if you are helping
the government soak up some of these toxic assets, should you assume that if you enter that
pool you might, yourself, as a company or a equity fund or investment house, be limited or
subject to future executive compensation limits?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, as I mentioned earlier, I think the program that was outlined today
is separate from what has previously been outlined in the TARP program.
Q    So, no?
MR. GIBBS:  Right.
Q    And so are publicly traded firms.  Is the administration open to that all?  Does it
think it needs to change the culture there?
MR. GIBBS:  I mean, I think the President has talked broadly about this, but I think details
of a proposal on that are ahead of itself.
Q    But the administration at least is open to that?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, the President previously supported providing shareholders with a
non-binding vote, a say on their pay, that through public opinion, the White House believes
would sway executive compensation.  But --
Q    But that's a bottom-up, not a government --
MR. GIBBS:  I don't have any details far beyond that.
Q    -- about the government doing this?
MR. GIBBS:  Right.
Mike.
Q    Yesterday, the head of the European Central Bank said that Europe doesn’t need to
increase spending more to combat the financial crisis.  How concerned is the administration
about what appears to be kind of a growing opposition in Europe to further stimulus
spending, which seems to be a direct contradiction to what the President wants?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I actually think that there -- well, I think the President has talked to,
and will talk to even more leaders that will be involved in the G20 throughout this week --
obviously Prime Minister Rudd will be here tomorrow and he’s got some calls scheduled for
later in the week.
But I think that certainly coming out of the finance ministers’ meeting a few weeks ago,
there was actually broad agreement that -- and the administration, as I’ve said from here,
has never -- there was never any intention to have everybody sign a document that required a
certain level or percentage of spending relating to their GDP, as was mentioned -- as the
IMF suggested.  But I believe that what was agreed on at that meeting was to continue to
monitor what might be needed to stimulate economies in order to address the downturn in
production that each economy will see as part of a global recession.
And I think the President will address this more tomorrow and throughout the week -- that I
think there is a lot of commonality in the agenda that the administration will pursue and
that other nations in the G20 will discuss next week at the summit, including, again,
monitoring the spending situation to ensure that if the recession becomes deeper or more
severe, that steps might be taken; that financial regulation is something that is enormously
important in a changing world; and lastly, that -- I know there is strong agreement that as
their markets have shrunk quickly because of this global recession, that exports have been
pulled back greatly, particularly those in more developing nations, that funding and help go
to those developing nations through the IMF in order to spur job creation and exports here
in this country.
You know, the President I think will probably use the same term on this -- I think you'll
hear him say this later this week -- that he looks at the London economic summit as an
agenda that is both/and rather than either/or.
Sheryl.
Q    Robert, a spokesman for Mikhail Gorbachev says that the President met Mr. Gorbachev
here at the White House on Friday.  What can you tell us about what they talked about?  And
why didn't the White House disclose the meeting?
MR. GIBBS:  I believe it was in the guidance that the Vice President was meeting with Mr.
Gorbachev.
Q    That's not the President.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the President tends to roam around the larger house, and sometimes walks
into meetings that weren't previously on his schedule.
Q    He could roam -- he could roam here.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  I think we did that once, and it seemed like Bourbon Street on Fat Tuesday. 
(Laughter.)
Q    So what did they talk about?
Q    What group did he -- (laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  The President -- well, look, obviously Vice President Biden met with the former
Soviet President Gorbachev, and obviously they discussed continued ways in which the United
States and Russia can work together to reduce our nuclear arsenal.  I think that's going to
be part of the upcoming topic when President Obama and President Medvedev meet in London;
that we continue to talk about ways in which we can further the agenda on mutual interests
like nuclear proliferation; on energy; on a whole host of ideas.
Q    Did he try to solicit Mr. Gorbachev's thoughts on missile defense and perhaps how to
secure cooperation with the Russians on that?
MR. GIBBS:  I can certainly check on that.  I don't know if that was discussed in the
meeting.
Q    Back to the assets program, briefly.  Eventually, and especially if the program takes
off, you're going to have to go back to Congress for more money.  Do you think they're
likely to stump up substantial amounts of money to help private investors make money off of
--
MR. GIBBS:  I think the American people and I think Congress and I think the President and
the administration are focused not on what has to happen months from now or longer than
that, but how best to implement a program that will get the economy moving again.  I think
it's wildly premature to get -- to get a whole lot farther down the road on that.
Yes.
Q    I wanted to follow up on the question about Gorbachev.  Vice President Biden, prior to
that, met with a different Russian delegation, with some business people.  Is he the point
man now at the White House on relations with Russian?
MR. GIBBS:  No, I don't think he's the point person.  I think obviously the Vice President
plays an extraordinarily important role in this administration's foreign policy.  He has
great experience through many years serving on the Foreign Relations Committee, and I think
is a valued member that the President leans on repeatedly.
Q    Can you remember a meeting on Russian policy where the President directly participated?
MR. GIBBS:  Where he didn't participate?
Q    Where he directly participated -- the President.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I just told you he was at Sheryl's secret meeting just a minute ago.
Q    I'm glad you called it "secret," Robert.
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- Sheryl's secret meeting.
Q    I didn't say it was secret.  (Laughter.)
Q    I was talking more about strategy -- strategy-setting meetings here at the White House,
not with guests.
MR. GIBBS:  Oh, oh.  I can look back at his schedule, but I think it's safe to assume that
we've discussed, as has been written, developments on policy that either is bilateral policy
with Russia or policy that includes Russia as one of many that take part in important
issues.
Q    And one last thing.
MR. GIBBS:  No, no, I have to get to Ann -- I'm all Russia'd out.
Q    Robert, what happened to the word "toxic"?  Do you have some marketing czar now who
decided that "legacy loans" is more attractive to private investors than the word "toxic"?
MR. GIBBS:  I think I used "toxic" earlier, so if the -- if there's a marketing czar, I've
failed to get his or her memo.  (Laughter.)
Yes, sir.
Q    Robert, what does the President --
MR. GIBBS:  Maybe I didn't read my own memo.  (Laughter.)
Sorry, go ahead.
Q    What's the President hoping to communicate tomorrow night with the press conference?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think as he's done over the past -- certainly the better part of the
past week, whether it's on "The Tonight Show" or on "60 Minutes," is to address directly
with the American people that challenges that the country faces and the choices that he's
working on with Congress to put our economy back on track and put the nation back on firmer
footing.
I think the -- I think the President has -- believes that a continued dialogue with the
American people about where we are and where we're going is necessary certainly in times
like this to give people a sense of what we're doing and a sense of where we're going; that
they may or may not like all the decisions that he makes, but I think he believes it's
important that they understand why he's making the decisions that he is.
Q    So there will be an opening statement?  Lengthy?
MR. GIBBS:  Not lengthy -- well, I guess it depends on your definition of lengthy.
Q    How long?
MR. GIBBS:  You know, two, three hours.  (Laughter.)
Q    Gridiron-lengthy?  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  I want to note that Chuck said that about the Gridiron, not me.
April.  Ms. Ryan.
Q    Yes.
MR. GIBBS:  Sorry.  For your lengthy question.
Q    Anyway --
MR. GIBBS:  Just playing.
Q    Yes, I know.  (Laughter.)  On the continued dialogue issue, will there be any news
tomorrow night --
MR. GIBBS:  I think that largely depends on the many important and impressive reporters
assembled in the room in which they will ask the President cutting questions and elicit
news.
Q    No, you know what I'm talking about.  I'm talking about an opening statement.  Stop
being flip.  (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS:  If I can't be flip, April, this is going to be pretty darn boring, isn't it?  I
guess we'll just have to go back to the lower podium.  (Laughter.)
I have not -- I have not read the full opening statement yet, but I will make sure that if
there is news, that the news reporters are apprised of such.
Q    Okay, all right.  Also --
Q    In defense of Gridiron, I want to say the Vice President was half-hour late.
MR. GIBBS:  Oh, well, I'm going to get somebody down here to give a 30-second response to
that, Helen.  (Laughter.)
Yes.
Q    Robert, one more question on the economy.  As the President is trying to save this
economy, the global economy is suffering as well, and this country has in the past borrowed
money from other countries, particularly China.  What happens if some of these countries
call their debts due from the United States?  You know, many of have said it would
destabilize this country.  What happens?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, two points on that.  One, this certainly came up a few weeks ago when --
relating to the Chinese.  And I think said then and I would said again that this country
remains the strongest and deepest capital market on the planet and the safest investment
that anybody could make.
Secondly, I would say that the President recognizes that we have to change our path of --
our fiscal path and put ourselves back on one that's far more sustainable than what we've
seen recently.  That's why the budget that he sent to Capitol Hill makes investments that
will grow our economy, but most importantly will cut the deficit in half in his first term;
that the President recognizes that we can't continue to do what's been done with simply
passing debt on to different generations.
Q    If a country does call some of the money due, are we -- no, it's a serious question.
MR. GIBBS:  I didn't say it wasn't a serious question; it's a seriously hypothetical
question and one I'm not --
Q    But it's a reality -- it could be a reality in this tough global economic recession.
MR. GIBBS:  April, I -- the minute it becomes a reality, I assume your hand will be straight
up in the air and I will call on you then.
Yes.
Q    Robert, the EPA has forwarded its endangerment finding to the White House.  Can you
enlighten us on whether there's an actual plan?  Are they recommending a scheme for
regulation?  And could you also talk about the timing of it, how quickly --
MR. GIBBS:  Yes, I think something popped up right before I came out here and I haven't
delved into this.  I know that -- I think the President has made quite clear on this that he
is -- the way to deal with greenhouse gases is to work with Congress in order to put
together a plan that deals with this and creates a market for renewable energy.
As you know, the Supreme Court, through their ruling, requires the EPA to look at the
potential public health risk that CO2 might cause, and I think that is -- not having seen
it, I think this is the -- just a step in that process.
Steve.
Q    Robert, the President sent out his political operation into the field over the weekend,
going door to door all over the country to muster support for the budget.  What's your --
what's your -- what have you heard?  How did it go?  What kind of reaction did they get? 
And is it producing anything?
MR. GIBBS:  Well, the only number I heard this morning was that about a million doors were
knocked on over the course of the weekend in order to build support for the President's plan
to make the important investments in health care, energy independence, and education reform,
and put ourselves back on that path toward fiscal sustainability, all of which is contained
in the budget.
And I think the President believes that whenever the public can get more greatly involved in
the process, as Congress starts through committees this week and on the floor next week,
approving a budget for next year, that that involvement, and hearing the opinions of people
that are reached through that door-knocking, are important in the process.
Q    Is it producing emails, phone calls?  And do you have a goal on how many people you
want to call in or send their messages to Congress?
MR. GIBBS:  I can check and see on that.  I would say if we knocked on a million doors, then
our goal was probably 750,000.  (Laughter.)
Q    Did the President see a rebuff or any signs of hope in Iran's response to his message? 
And have you guys made any assessment as to how deeply this has penetrated into Iranian
society, how much the (inaudible) has been passed, et cetera?
MR. GIBBS:  Let me check on -- if there were any Internet metrics that are important.  Look,
the President, as you heard him talk about in the message, this was an effort and an
opportunity to speak directly to the Iranian people and their leaders, to underscore the
potential for a new and changed relationship based on our shared rights and
responsibilities.  The President believes it's time for that change.  And regardless of any
response or -- the President is hopeful that the Iranian leadership will work to change the
way that they do business.
Thanks, guys.
Q    Thanks.
END                       
3:21 P.M. EDT
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/25/09

THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
__________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                              March 25, 2009

PRESS BRIEFING
BY
PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS

James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
2:58 P.M. EDT
      MR. GIBBS:  Good afternoon.  I'll make a couple of brief announcements before we get started.
      The President just had a good meeting on the Hill with Senators Dorgan and Conrad, Representative Pomeroy of North Dakota, Senator Klobuchar and Representative Peterson of Minnesota.  The President is following the situation in Minnesota and North Dakota closely.  He approved the disaster declaration last night and assured members of Congress that he will act on any request for assistance quickly.
      Secretary of Homeland Security has spoken to the North Dakota Governor to ask for what he needed and to convey that the government was coordinating at all levels.  The ice floes in the river bear watching closely and the President assured members -- assured the members that the administration will do that, and remains ready to react as necessary.
      I'd also note that the President has watched with admiration as students whose schools have been closed joined volunteers from all over both states to assist first responders with sandbags and additional preparations.
      Secondly, I want to announce the bilateral meetings that President Obama will hold in London next week at the G20 summit.  In addition to meeting, obviously, with Prime Minister Gordon Brown, the President will also meet with Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.  On Wednesday, April 1st, President Obama will meet President Hu of China.  Also on the 1st, President Obama will meet for the first time with Russian President Medvedev.  On Thursday, April 2nd, President Obama will meet with Indian Prime Minister Singh, in addition to the President of the Republic of Korea, Lee -- that's also on April 2nd.
      And lastly, the President, as you know, has been on Capitol Hill this morning and is enormously pleased with the progress that both the House and the Senate are making on working toward a budget that reflects the priorities and the investments that he wanted to see in a budget.  He's happy that those investments are on track to be made in this budget, and is also pleased that the budget also fulfills his goal of cutting the budget deficit that he inherited in half over the course of his term in office.
      Again, significant investments in health care reform, energy independence, and in education.  So I'm sure there will be some more on that topic.
      And with that, Ms. Loven.
      Q    Thank you.  Can you just describe a little bit more fully the meetings he had on the Hill, what some of the give-and-take was between them?
      MR. GIBBS:  I'll get a better readout from -- Josh Earnest went up there with the President; I did not -- I did not travel with the President up to Capitol Hill today.
      I know that -- to answer more broadly, as I just said, I think the President is enormously pleased with the progress that the two committees are making; that the progress demonstrates that what the President set up and what those two budget committees are working on is to make important investments, as I said, in health care reform and ensuring that our children are educated for a 21st-century global economy, and to make necessary and needed investments in energy independence, all while cutting the budget deficit in half over the course of his term in office.
      Q    And I just had, quickly, a different topic.  And did he come away from these meetings, do you think, with any more certainty that Democrats won't be -- up to this point, Democrats have been almost as loudly critical of the budget as Republicans and wanting certain changes made to it.  Does he feel any differently about their -- Democrats' position after this meeting?
      MR. GIBBS:  Let me focus, I think, on what Peter Orszag said in a conference call with some of you all this morning.  The budget documents that the House and Senate are now considering -- they are about a 98 percent -- or about 98 percent the same.  So I know there's a tendency in this town to focus on the two of a hundred that you might not be getting.  The President prefers to focus on the 98 percent that are in these budgets that are similar or identical to what he hoped each of the House and the Senate would do, and more importantly, as he's talked about and talked about last night, put our country on the path not just to renewed fiscal responsibility, but to making important investments that have long been delayed and instituting a strong foundation for long-term continued economic growth.  I think both these budget documents appear to be headed strongly in that direction, and the President is pleased with that.
      Q    Can you say anything about the F-22 crash in California?
      MR. GIBBS:  I just saw it as I was coming out, so I don't have anything on it, but we will try to get something on that.
      Q    In the meeting the President had with the NATO Secretary General today, was he able to brief him on the details of the Afghanistan review?  And when is he going to make those details available to the public, and in what format?  Is he going to give a speech about it or --
      MR. GIBBS:  I think it is -- when the President is ready to make an announcement, obviously we will -- that's likely to happen before we go overseas, and I would look for that as early as the next few days.
      I know that the President spoke about it today in the meeting.  I don't know to the degree to which he fully briefed on that.  But obviously, I think it's something you'll see as early as the next few days.
      Q    Okay, just one other question on a very different topic.  I just wanted to follow up on the question that Major asked to the President last night about the dollar.
      MR. GIBBS:  You mean Garrett?  (Laughter.)
      Q    Ha ha ha.  (Laughter.)
      Q    I'm just wondering is it -- is it a concern that the President is even being asked about the status of the dollar at a time when he's going to the G20 trying to show leadership on the economy, that questions are being raised about currency?
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't blame Major at all for the question that he asked the President last evening.  (Laughter.)  No, I'm kidding.  No, no, I --
      Q    Do you think that it makes a statement about the questions that are being raised abroad about the American economy and its strength and the dollar --
      MR. GIBBS:  No, the President's first job in -- when he walked into this White House was to do everything he could to strengthen our economy, to create jobs, to get it back on a sound footing, to put it on a path towards sustained economic growth, but also to acknowledge that we've gotten away from fiscal sanity, and that this budget puts us back on a path towards doing something far more responsible with our budget.
      I've said, and the President has said now a couple of different times, that America is the strongest and safest place to invest in the world.  And I think that will continue to be the case for a long, long time.
      But the President is -- the President is going to do what he thinks is in the best interest of the American people in getting the American economy growing and moving again.  I think the steps that have been taken thus far in the Recovery Plan and in financial stability plans -- we've seen already domestically a drop in mortgage rates, some of which are attributable to the plan that was put forward to stabilize the housing market.
      I think the President is pleased with the progress that we've made, understanding that we've got a long way to go.  And I don't think he's too worried about what other people might think about the actions that we're taking.
      Dan.
      Q    To focus on that 2 percent for a moment:  Is the President at all disappointed that the middle-class tax cuts that he talked so much about on the campaign trail may not end up in the budget?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's understand what is -- what's already been signed into law.
      Q    Beyond --
      MR. GIBBS:  Right.  But let's understand, again, that within the first month of walking into the White House, the President got his middle-class tax cut and Making Work Pay for 95 percent of working families in this country to be law for the first two years of his administration.
      Look, we're -- we understand that legislating is an active sport.  But we've got now a couple of years to make decisions about how to include that for the long term.  Again, I'd -- it's hard for me to focus exactly on what's going to happen in years three and four, when I think we feel pretty good about what we've gotten in years one and two.  Obviously OMB announced today the creation of a task force to look into ideas of tax simplification and closing the tax gap in this country as a way of bringing about ideas -- bringing ideas forward as to how to make Making Work Pay permanent, and it still remains one of the President's priorities.
      Q    On another unrelated issue, the National Urban League today released a study talking about the disparity -- African Americans twice as likely to be unemployed, three times as likely to live in poverty, six times as likely to be incarcerated.  What is the President's reaction to this?  And I know that the Urban League is calling on the President to do something about these disparities.  What's his reaction and what can he do to make this --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the best way to address a number of the statistics that you just mentioned are the same way the President talked about this last night, which is we have to get this economy moving again; we have to give job opportunities and hope to everybody in America, that -- and the best to do that is to get the economy moving again.
      
      Obviously the President has worked on, throughout his career in Illinois and in Washington, ways to reduce recidivism, to provide a second chance, and is working day and night to get that economy moving again and provide the opportunity that's needed to reduce homelessness and unemployment.
      Yes, sir.
      Q    If the President is as pleased as you say with progress today on the budget, does that mean that he got the leadership of his party to drop some of the conditions that they were beginning to put in there, like taking out health care, taking out -- perhaps taking out --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I don't -- I think if you'll read the budget document that is being worked on in the House and the Senate, health care is not taken out of the budget.  The budget that we proposed was -- you've already -- you're already looking a little forlorn in my answer.  We proposed --
      Q    I'm looking at Ed; I've got more.  (Laughter.) 
      MR. GIBBS:  Good, all right.  Let me -- let me address the here and now.  We can get to the what's next.
      The President proposed a deficit-neutral reserve fund for health care reform.  Contained in the budget today is a deficit-neutral reserve fund for health care reform.  We're quite pleased with that and think we're making progress towards cutting costs and reducing the number of uninsured.
      Q    If it cuts the deficit in half as you say --
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't say that.  No, hold on, let's be fair -- hold on, let me do the here and now.  I don't say that it cuts the deficit in half.  The House Budget Committee document says it cuts the budget deficit in half.  The Senate --
      Q    All right, fair enough.
      MR. GIBBS:  Hold on, I'll finish.  The Senate document says it cuts the budget deficit in half.  We proposed a plan that would cut the budget deficit in the House, and both the House and the Senate concur that that goal was met.
      Q    Using which assumptions?  The OMB or the CBO?
      MR. GIBBS:  Using the assumptions that they are to create the budget document that has to pass each committee before going to the floor and approved by both House and reconciled together to create the budget of the United States of America.
      Q    It seems less likely that they could get there using the CBO assumptions than they could using your more rosy assumptions.
      MR. GIBBS:  I think Congress is, if I'm not mistaken, legally bound to using its own budget office for assumptions.
      So if the House has determined that the budget document that it's considering in its committee cuts the budget deficit in half using the congressionally mandated assumptions of the Congressional Budget Office, doesn't it meet the test you just laid out for me?
      Q    If they --
      MR. GIBBS:  And if the Senate were to do the same thing using the congressionally mandated assumptions in the Congressional Budget Office, wouldn't that also meet the test of cutting the budget deficit in half?
      Q    Yes, if in fact that's what's happened.
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I would suggest that a quick call to somebody on Capitol Hill will denote that -- if I'm believing what I read in the press -- and sometimes I temper that -- but I understand that we've met those objections and I think you can feel relieved.
      Q    And the President still gets what he wants in terms of energy and health care?
      MR. GIBBS:  We have a deficit-neutral reserve fund for health care reform.  There's a reserve fund for energy independence that will allow us to make critical investments in energy independence.  That's in there.  There are increases in education funding in addition to the $100 billion in education increases that we saw in the Recovery and Reinvestment Plan, including in the budget changes that will update Pell Grants -- all of which magically using the Congressional Budget Office estimates cut the budget deficit in half in his first term as he pledged he would do.
      Q    Well, I want to get into this 98 percent that you claim -- because to go to -- one of the things they do is -- so if you have no middle-class tax cut that they take out, if there is no more honest budgeting as far as the TARP funds are concerned, that's one thing -- they seem to take it --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think they -- you know, they've just -- they've accounted --
      Q    -- cap and trade, which is something you needed to account for.  You guys were --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, understand that --
      Q    -- revenue from cap and trade.
      MR. GIBBS:  Right, well, that's why -- I mean, that's why Make Work Pay is not in years three and four of the budget.
      Q    I guess I'm just trying to figure out how you get to 90 -- why you believe this is a document that's 98 percent?  And also, you guys made the case -- and I'm not going to judge whether 10 years or five years is more honest budgeting -- but you guys made a big deal out of this 10-year projection.  And they're out saying, no, no, no, no, no, five-year projection.  They also have the AMT -- they are taking the AMT fix out, which you said was part of it.  So I'm just trying to figure out how you get to 98 percent --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, because --
      Q    -- because this was a document that's 98 percent, when there's a lot of things that you guys bragged about --
      MR. GIBBS:  Right, the spending --
      
      Q    -- when you unveiled this budget, that's gone.
      
      MR. GIBBS:  I think I would refer you to Peter's transcript, which I don't have with me --
      
      Q    I have it.
      
      MR. GIBBS:  -- that showed -- do you have it?  Great.  I think it's on page two where he's asked specifically about the spending differences in the House and the Senate.  And I think the spending difference in the House is less than 1 percent, and the spending difference in the Senate is less than 1.5 percent.
      
      Q    But you're saying the President is satisfied to sort of -- there's some parts of the honest budgeting thing that you guys were really proud of --
      
      MR. GIBBS:  And change is not easy to bring in Washington.  The President -- would the President like to see a 10-year budget?  Would the President like to see disasters fully accounted for?  Would the President like to see budgeting that accounts for the possibility of more money to stabilize our financial system?  Yes.
      
      Q    And you acknowledge that --
      
      MR. GIBBS:  I hesitate to say I'm almost positive that many in this room, including Bill, have yet to give the President credit for such a thing.
      
      Q    But you acknowledge that Congress doesn't have any of that stuff in there.
      
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I'm going to wait, like Bill, and see what's in there.  (Laughter.)
      
      Q    But that's 98 percent -- I mean -- I don't mean -- but you throw the 98 percent out there as a way to, you know, to sort of lecture us, saying, oh, you guys are just focused on 2 percent.  But is it really -- are we really focusing on 2 percent?  It's a lot of --
      
      MR. GIBBS:  Or one-point-something percent like Peter --
      
      Q    No, but that's a lot of rhetorical pledges that you guys talked about earlier that --
      
      MR. GIBBS:  Yes, well -- I mean, look --
      
      Q    -- that have been --
      
      MR. GIBBS:  But let's also understand -- again, let's understand what's in the budget.  The President wanted a deficit-neutral reserve fund for health care reform, and he gets one.  The President wanted investments in clean energy, so that we wouldn’t be at the whim of foreign countries for the importation of our fuel, and we get one.  The President wanted increases in educational spending to create a workforce that's ready for a 21st century economy, and he gets it.  The President wanted to cut the deficit in half over the course of his first four years in office, and it happens.  The President wanted Congress to budget for and account for the spending in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and that's in there.
      
      Did the President get everything he wanted?  No.  I think Presidents rarely do get everything they want.  Is the President satisfied that we're making critical investments in health care reform, education reform, energy independence, all while cutting the deficit in half in just four years?  He's pleased with that.
      
      Q    Strictly speaking on budget shortfalls, the Postal Service is up there testifying today they may not be able to make payroll without a bailout.
      
      MR. GIBBS:  The check isn't in the mail.  (Laughter.)
      
      Q    That's part of the problem:  People aren't mailing checks.  So they don't have -- they may not be able to make payroll in September, at the end of their fiscal year.  Does the President -- and they may want to cut back and say, where's the President on this --
      MR. GIBBS:  I can certainly check on that.
      Q    -- does he --
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't have anything on the Postal Service for you, but I can certainly check.
      Laura.
      Q    Thank you.  You said that you were not in the meetings with the President on the Hill today, and I respect that.  But going into the meeting, what was the President's message to the Democrats that he met with?  Was it:  Here are my priorities, and this is what I'd like you -- my priorities to be your priorities; we're all on the same team.  Was it party unity?  What exactly did he --
      MR. GIBBS:  I think a little bit of both.  But I don't think he has to convince the members of the Democratic Senate Caucus that we need to make important investments in health care, energy, education, and put ourselves back on the path toward fiscal responsibility.
      Q    What did he want to say to them that --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, the President talked to -- the President did as he did last night in front of many of you, which was to advocate for his budget and his priorities, to understand that for a long period of time we've failed to make investments, to lay a path toward long-term economic growth, that instead we've sort of depended on bubble and bust; that we are making those investments, putting ourselves back on a path toward fiscal responsibility, and that working together we can see this happen.
      Q    So his message to them was no different than the things he's been saying publicly all along?
      MR. GIBBS:  Yes.
      Q    And how concerned are you in terms of if there is additional bailout funds, which you referred to a moment ago, if they are not included in the budget, how concerned are you about the administration's ability to deal with another problem if it were to come along?
      MR. GIBBS:  The economic team is confident in the resources that they have previously appropriated in the Troubled Asset Recovery Program.  And obviously the plan that Treasury put forward earlier this week uses a mix of public and private investors to ensure that stability.  So I think the plan that they outlined leverages a much larger amount of money to stabilize the system, and they think they're okay.
      Q    So if you're confident you'll be fine, then why did you ask for $750 billion?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, we asked for as part of a budget plan to account for the possibility that it may be needed.  But obviously I think in the middle -- middle to late April we'll get bank health assessments back that give us a better sense of exactly what banks are holding and what might be necessary in a worst-case economic downturn.  You know, we wanted to account for that -- for the possibility that it ultimately might be needed.
      Q    Robert, can you talk a little bit about tomorrow's online forum, how the questions are going to be chosen?  I know that there's some voting going on online right now, but is there going to be another process to kind of go through all of them, make sure that they're all read?  And also, what --
      MR. GIBBS:  Bill is voting right now.  (Laughter.)
      Q    And what is the President hoping to get accomplished with this?  I mean, is this another way to sort of pitch his budget, or what's the intent?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the -- I mean, obviously -- and I'm a little less tech-savvy than the folks that are putting this together, but we -- (laughter) -- we wanted to -- look, I think the President wanted to give the opportunity for people that might watch all over the country to vote on areas in which we've talked about and that are important priorities for the administration, like education, energy independence and health care reform, to give them a chance to ask the President about some of those issues, along with our economic recovery.
      
      The President just thinks it's another opportunity to talk directly with the American people about the challenges that we have, the choices and the decisions that we're making, and the path that we're -- the path that we're taking to get us back to prosperous days.
      
      So it's a -- it's not a whole lot different than when we were in California doing the meeting, it's just we'll have people hooked up from a lot of different places all over the country.  But he'll be able to do all that from the East Room.
      Yes, sir.
      Q    Robert, there are a couple of legislative proposals floating around on the plight of the nation's newspapers -- tax considerations and other issues.  Has the administration weighed in on this, and what, if anything, do you think the government's role should be?
      MR. GIBBS:  Boy, I'm going to answer this question carefully.  (Laughter.)  Joking.
      I have -- I will check and see if the administration has weighed in, in any way.  I saw a blurb about them, but I don't know whether or not the administration has in any way taken a position on that legislation.
      Q    From a philosophical standpoint, do you think the government should have a role in saving companies --
      MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- let me get some specifics from folks who would have a better sense -- obviously, strong believer in freedom of speech and -- but I don't have anything on the specific -- let me check on whether there's any specific guidance on the legislation.  I'll note that a radio guy asked that question.  (Laughter.)  David Jackson seems relieved.  (Laughter.)
      Q    An hour or so ago there were some reports about missiles on a launch pad in North Korea.  Is that causing any concern here?  What -- can you tell us anything about that?
      MR. GIBBS:  I have not seen those reports.
      Q    All right.  Another question.  On Friday, the President is having bankers come in.  Can you talk to us a little bit about the nature of that, who's coming, and why?  And is he making any requests of the bankers?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think along the lines of what the President said in interviews -- in an interview over the weekend -- and we'll provide a list of the CEOs that will be here.  I think the President wants to talk to them -- obviously Secretary Geithner will testify tomorrow on regulatory reform.  The President and the Secretary have talked about the idea of giving the government the ability to resolve systemic risks that pose great problems to our financial system were they to get into trouble.
      I think the President looks forward to getting an update on what they're seeing happening in the economy.  And I think, much as the President said, like he said this past weekend, that Main Street and Wall Street, all of us are in this together.  We're all in the same boat.  We have to understand that what is -- what is good for one has to be also good for the other.
      So I think the President will talk to the bankers about -- about that, and I anticipate that some of the concerns that we've read about over the past two weeks will be mentioned.  It's not intended in any way to be the focus of the meeting, but I think the President wants to have a discussion with the leading bankers in America about ways to get the economy stabilized and moving again.
      Q    Is executive compensation going to be on the agenda?
      MR. GIBBS:  I imagine that will be mentioned in the meeting, yes.
      Major.
      Q    Robert, last night the President said he does not believe there's any need for a global currency.  This morning, at the Council on Foreign Relations, Treasury Secretary Geithner was asked about that, and he said that the suggestion originally made by the Chinese Central Bank Governor is one that deserves consideration, and he called the Governor someone whose credibility is -- has a great record of credibility.  And it sounded as if the Treasury Secretary was at least opening the door to this as a concept.
      Since this is likely to come up at the G20, can you say definitively that it's not something that the administration is open to and is not going to consider under any basis?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the Secretary of Treasury has put out a statement saying that and echoing what the President said last night, that the dollar will be the reserve currency for a long, long time.
      Q    Two other quick ones.  Yesterday on the Hill, representatives of the Fed and the FDIC briefed folks on the Banking Committee saying, if in fact there is cram-down legislation passed and signed by the President, it could diminish the value of some of the very toxic assets the administration, with the plan announced this week, is hoping outside investors will purchase.
      
      Does the administration believe these two things are now on a collision course, and what would it choose to -- what would it prefer to do?  Not have cram-down legislation and let the toxic asset plan that's been announced proceed?  Or have cram-down legislation that could diminish the value of these things and make them hard to sell?
      MR. GIBBS:  Let me -- I'm not aware of what FDIC and Fed -- I'm not aware of what they spoke about.  Let me get some idea --
      Q    In general, is the cram-down legislation something that could complicate this plan?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, let me get some better understanding of what they told the committee.  I think the President, the FDIC and the Fed have worked -- all worked together to develop the plan that Secretary Geithner talked about on Tuesday.  So I think it's very safe to assume that in working together they're all supportive of that idea.  They're also supportive of the ability to resolve systemic risks in our economy, as the Secretary and the Fed Chair talked about yesterday.  I don't have anything specifically on -- I'll look for some guidance on that and we can talk.
      Q    Last quick one.  The Washington Post blogged last night that there's an effort to expunge or get rid of the terminology "global war on terrorism."  Can you tell me if that's true or untrue and what, if anything, the administration has for or against that particular phrase?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- you know, I saw the blog and I saw the comments from OMB.  There's no language or memo certainly that I've seen or has been passed around.  I think from the President's perspective, I think the phraseology is -- he's far less concerned with and much more concerned with steps that he's taken and that we need to take as a country to protect our citizens and to keep our homeland safe.  And I think that's what he's focused on.  But I'm -- I have not seen or am unaware of said memo.
      Mike.
      Q    Robert, can you talk a little more about what the President would like to see come out of this tax reform panel?  Is he looking for ideas to raise revenue, close loopholes?  I know Orszag talked about corporate welfare, and could you give some example of that?
      
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- you know, without getting too far ahead of where the task force is, obviously, as Peter described in his call -- and if you guys don't have a transcript, we can certainly make it available -- there is obviously a tax gap in the country.  Many have talked about the fact that several hundred billion dollars each year of taxes goes uncollected.  The President addressed the need and necessity to close tax loopholes in his budget in order to institute fairness in our tax code.
      And so the President has asked the recovery board to take a look at and forward to him by Friday, December 4th, ideas for exactly how -- what loopholes might be looked at or might be closed; that the size of the tax gap and ways to ensure that that's closed, as Peter said.  I think the charge of the board is to do all of those things, and understand that recommendations -- the President is not interested in recommendations that would affect people that make $250,000 or less, as he said repeatedly during the campaign.
      Q    Did Mr. Orszag have anything specific in mind when he talked about corporate welfare?
      MR. GIBBS:  No, I -- look I think we've talked about  -- we've talked about some of them, and some of them are certainly in the budget, whether it's cuts in ag spending for large corporate farms, things like that.  Obviously this is -- the hope of what this task force will do is take an honest look at the budget and go through and determine if there are steps that can be taken by Congress and this President to institute greater fairness in the tax code and how that would affect putting us back on that path to fiscal sustainability.
      Sheryl.
      Q    Robert, the President talked last night about urging Americans to look beyond their self-interest.  Tonight he's going to two political fundraisers, one of them $30,000 a couple.  Is that an example of looking beyond our self-interest?  And are you worried about the tone that that sets in a time when Americans are struggling?
      MR. GIBBS:  No, I think you -- I think when you -- though I hope he's not placid and unsmiling -- I think you'll see in the remarks he makes tonight and I think you can be rest assured in the remarks he's made yesterday that he fully understands the hardships and the troubles that the American people are undergoing in their lives each day.  But I think it's also safe to assume that the President wants to see a strong party system in this country.  And I would mention that in that, the -- we haven't seen politics by either party stop in this period, though I think the President fully understands the situation the American people face.
      Q    Will he urge some of those donors to contribute to charity or use his remarks in some other way to --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- look, I --
      Q    note the broader situation as --
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think the -- I think the situation will -- I think the remarks will denote the situation.  I think the remarks will denote the actions that he's taking to change the situation in this country.  I think the President has been focused every day on how to make the situation for average Americans better.  He always encourages people to get involved, to knock on doors, to give to charity, and to do whatever they can to help out their neighbors.
      Yes, sir.
      Q    Robert, just a couple quick -- more about tomorrow's online forum.  First of all, is this going to be a regular feature, has the President had in mind doing something like this?
      MR. GIBBS:  Yes, I -- you know, again, it's a way for the President to do what he enjoys doing out on the road, but saves on gas.  (Laughter.)
      Q    Should we also see this in the context of the weekend -- you know, going door to door, political organization as well as -- sort of like nonstop, 24/7, keeping in touch with the American people?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, again, I think the President -- this was part of what he wanted to do last night and what he told the American people in his opening statement, which was -- I think he looks at all these opportunities as a way of providing an update to the American people about the steps that we're taking to get us, as he said last night, from recession to recovery; to document the challenges that we have; but also understand that steps are being taken and that if we follow through on this, that brighter days are ahead, as they always have been for this country.  So I think it's just another opportunity for him to communicate with the American people.
      Q    I guess what I'm asking is, is this another sign of the never-ending campaign?
      MR. GIBBS:  I don't -- only if you look at press conferences like last night as a sign that there's a never-ending political campaign or a Saturday radio address as if it were part of a never-ending political campaign.
      Q    Why would he do that?  (Laughter.)
      MR. GIBBS:  To give the -- to give you guys something to report at 7:06 a.m.
      Jon.
      Q    I just had a clarification -- I had a clarification on Roger's question, before I ask my question.  Friday, with the CEOs/bankers -- I'm not clear as to what these folks are, but --
      MR. GIBBS:  It's bank CEOs, sorry.
      Q    Okay.
      MR. GIBBS:  I think it's -- I don't have the schedule in front of me.  I believe it is Friday afternoon here.
      Q    Okay.  And I just was wondering, in terms of what the President is going to be promoting or alleviating fear about -- are we talking mostly about Geithner's plan to unfreeze credit markets with the budget, or both?
      MR. GIBBS:  I think both.  I think -- and as I said, I think the agenda will be broader.  I think you'll -- like I said, I think you'll get into some of the issues that we talked about last week.  I think he'll talk about -- they'll have a discussion about the administration's plan to institute new rules of the road in regulatory reform or in the plans that Secretary Geithner laid out in terms of resolution authority.
      I think -- look, I also think -- just from the point of view of the President getting an update from what they're seeing in the global credit markets and what that means for economic recovery.
      So I think the conversation will be broad and wide-ranging.
      Q    And the Czech Prime Minister I believe today referred to Obama administration's economic plans as "the road to hell."  Beyond just your reaction to that, aren't you -- isn't the President scheduled to meet with this leader next week in Prague?  And doesn't this complicate that meeting at all?
      MR. GIBBS:  No, the President looks forward to his first meeting with the EU as an opportunity to discuss issues of transatlantic cooperation; we're going to be in Prague, and he looks forward to a deepening relationship with the Czech people.
      From what I can tell, the speaker has some domestic political problems that might speak more to what he was talking about, and I think the Czech people and the American people can stand assured that the President of the United States of America is going to do all and everything in his power to get our economy moving again and to restore confidence in that economy.
      John.
      Q    Set aside the budget resolution, since most of the tough policy questions are going to be settled down the line in the process anyway; it does seem to me that the most important part of your program that's got a real political challenge in terms of its prospects for passing is cap and trade.  What is your assessment of the viability of that program specifically?  And if you can't pass it, what are alternatives that might achieve the President's goals?
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, as you know, the House Energy and Commerce Committee is working on cap and trade legislation.  There are ideas that are bouncing around in the Senate and have for some time about -- about ways to institute a cap and trade program that the President and the administration are looking at and are encouraged by.
      I think, though, that the President believes, whether it's - - whether it's funding in the recovery or moving forward with more comprehensive energy -- legislation on energy independence, that there are steps outside of a cap and trade program that he talked about during the campaign and has talked about as President that can put our country on a greater path towards energy independence -- whether that's increased domestic production, whether that's something like the stop he did last week on battery technology, alternative fuels, investments in tax credits for wind and solar power generation -- that all of those things, be it in the budget, in the recovery plan, or in separate energy legislation, the President believes we have the opportunity to do what hasn't been done in quite some time.
      And I've talked about it here where -- I think you go back to, and it's probably even farther than that, but you go back to Nixon, and every President stood up in front of a joint session of Congress or in a big speech and declared the desire to see a lessening of our dependence on foreign oil. 
      The President believes that we've taken important steps in the recovery and in this budget, as well as steps that we can take through the separate legislative process to put us on that path.
      Q    So you're not looking at cap and trade specifically as the test for achieving his --
      MR. GIBBS:   Well, no.  I think there's a number of different ways that -- I think in many ways a cap and trade system and investments in alternative energy and alternative fuels work very much hand in hand.  And I think the President sees that as an important step forward in how we can reduce our dependence on foreign oil.
      This is a conversation that is largely joined sometime in the middle or late summer when gas prices spike.  And hopefully, the President believes, we can take steps now to avoid some of those price spikes in the future, and not be at the whim of a foreign country for our energy.
      Q    Thank you.
      MR. GIBBS:  April.
      
      Q    Robert, I want to piggyback off of Ann Compton's question last night on race.  Today, the National Urban League came out with the State of Black America 2009:  A Message to the President.  Also, this month marks the one-year anniversary of President Obama's famous race speech in Philadelphia.
      
      Now, going back to the State of Black America, it says there's a tale of two black Americas.  One is for pride for the President, Barack Obama.  And then the other one, it goes on to say our prisons are disproportionately populated by African American males, the economic crisis is hitting our communities especially hard, leaving huge numbers of African Americans without homes, jobs, or life savings.  We see an unemployment rate that's double that of whites, and wide academic achievement gaps.
      
      What say you?  And how is this administration going to deal with the issues on a socioeconomic level, as well as the issue of race, compassion, heart issue?
      
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, as I talked about earlier, the best way to deal with a number of the statistics that you talk about;  a rising achievement gap, rising unemployment, and a disparity -- in that is to make important investments in things like health care and education, and to work toward an economic recovery.
      
      I think the President believes we took a step forward in that in his plan that he believes will save or create 3.5 million jobs; that will make critical investments, down payments in education reform; open up the doors of opportunity not just for young people and early childhood education, but also through tax credits to make college more affordable, or in this budget, that will raise the level of Pell Grants that are available for students.
      
      I think the President believes that we've got a long way to go in this country to providing more hope and opportunity, and to get our economy moving again is one of the best ways to begin that.
      
      Q    Is some of this a heart issue, an issue of compassion?  I mean, you know, there are disproportionate numbers across the board, according to this book from the Urban League.  Is some of this a heart issue versus just policy?
      
      MR. GIBBS:  Well, absolutely.  I mean, I think, first of all, you have to -- and I think the President is a believer in this -- and that is you have to use your heart in your policy; that the President believes strongly in the investments that he's asked the Congress to join him in, in this budget.  That's why priority was put on a big expansion in education funding in the Recovery Plan, again, to ensure that kids were getting a healthy head start.
      
      We all know the statistics about early childhood education and the difference that it makes even before kids get to kindergarten.  As the President talked about a few weeks ago, investing in our teachers.  The single most important aspect of any child's education is who is standing in front of their classroom each day, instructing them and helping them learn -- whether at a young age, the basics, or math and science as they get older and into high school, and hopefully, providing more and more young people with the grades and the opportunity to seek higher education.
      
      And I think the President challenged all of America to, in his speech to Congress, to seek one year of post-high school education, whether it's vocational training or college education, to create a more educated workforce that can meet the growing demand for the jobs of the future.
      
      George -- I'll take one more.
      
      Q    On the upcoming summit, first a logistical question.  What are the briefing plans?  Will there be a briefing this week?
      
      MR. GIBBS:  We talked about -- I don't know whether this is going to be Friday or early next week or not, but we will -- we will do a logistical briefing to run you through some of what I talked about here today and some of the upcoming events that the President will have on his schedule over the course of the many days that we're overseas.
      
      Q    And a quick follow on your answer to Major and Caren, isn't he on the defensive going into this summit with all the things that were talked about there -- on the dollar, the Czech --
      
      MR. GIBBS:  No, I think the President is -- as he said last night, I think the President looks forward to working in concert with the G20 to get our economy moving again.  And I think what you'll see come out of this summit will be an agreement on further evaluating what efforts need to be taken to meet the drop in global demand.  I think you'll see the President talk about -- and there will be some broad agreement on a changing of the rules of the road and financial regulation.
      
      And lastly, I think you've already seen agreement among many of the nations that are going to be involved in the G20 to look for ways at stimulating export growth that we've seen pull back considerably in this global recession and how that has affected and impacted developing nations most of all -- what that means for each individual countries are exports and real jobs.
      
      And so I think the President looks forward to that.  I think the President believes that what will come out of this will be broad agreement among the G20 on the steps that we have to take to get our economy moving again.
      
      Thanks, guys.
      
                                END                  3:48 P.M. EDT
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3-26-09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secrectary
__________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                       March 26, 2009 

PRESS BRIEFING
BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
2:30 P.M. EDT
MR. GIBBS: How is everyone? Good afternoon. No announcements, so we'll just start with Mr. Feller.
Q Thanks, Robert. On Afghanistan, two topics, please. General Eikenberry said that allies need to do more towards the war effort, and of course you've been hearing this for some time. But I'm wondering what specifically the President wants from NATO allies. Is he going to have a specific ask for more troops? Can you talk about that?
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me give you a little bit broader answer on Afghanistan and our Afghanistan-Pakistan review.
The President is making calls and briefing members of Congress based on the conclusion of that review, which the President will announce tomorrow at the White House. So I'm not going to, predictably, get in front of that.
I think you've heard both the President -- both President Obama and Candidate Obama discuss the need for a greater influx of help and resources in a very dangerous part of the world. We'll have more to say on the comprehensive policy tomorrow.
I will say, just broadly, that the calls and the consultation that are happening today are the end of a long process of consulting with members of Congress and coordinating with the -- with international leaders about this. And the President, like I said, will have more to say about this tomorrow.
Q Is it fair to say -- just a quick follow -- is it fair to say, on a broad level, that there will be requests for more troops from the international community?
MR. GIBBS: I anticipate this will be a continuing thing that the President will discuss in the coming weeks.
Q And also, quickly on autos, in the town hall today, the President said that he's expecting automakers will -- that they must be willing to restructure. Does the President think that U.S. automakers make cars that Americans want to buy?
MR. GIBBS: Well, he owns one of them, so I think the answer to that is safely yes.
Q What does he own?
MR. GIBBS: A Ford Escape Hybrid, like his Press Secretary. It's a nice car, it really is.
Q Where is it?
MR. GIBBS: It's on West Exec. It's grey.
Q No, not yours. (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: Oh.
Q Is it in the motorcade? (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: No, it's --
Q Is this a new fundraising tool?
Q Is it brought to you by Ford --
Q Are you being paid? Are you being paid to give this endorsement?
MR. GIBBS: No, I'm a proud Ford owner, and I'm happy to say that.
No, the President's Ford is back in Chicago. Probably for good reason, the Secret Service doesn't let him drive anymore, which I know he misses. But no, obviously the President believes that American automakers are building cars that Americans want to buy and that are also being sold overseas. But I think, Ben, it's important to understand even what people would consider to be the most successful auto companies right now are in a general global economic slowdown; all have been severely hurt. I think I mentioned a few weeks ago that Toyota had sought help from the Japanese government.
It is hard -- I think the President used some statistics today. If you're selling on an annual basis -- if you were selling two years ago on an annual basis 16 million cars, and you're selling -- or on the path to sell on an annual basis this year 9 million cars, then you're going to have some problems with the companies that manufacture those cars and the dealers that sell those cars.
What the President said today and what he's maintained throughout this process is that America needs viable automobile manufacturers, but viability means that they are operating without government assistance. I think that's what all of us want to see.
Obviously the President, as part of viability plans from both GM and Chrysler, is required by the 31st to give an update on those plans and where our government sees them, and we'll be doing that also in the next few days.
Jeff.
Q A follow-up on cars. You say in the next few days, and the President said as well in the next several days -- will that happen before he goes to Europe, which is Tuesday?
MR. GIBBS: Yes.
Q So Monday, perhaps?
MR. GIBBS: Could be Monday. (Laughter.)
Q And I was struck, as well, he mentioned that there are a lot of mismanagement in the U.S. auto industry. Will the task force require any changes in management at GM and Chrysler as part of that package?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think if you look at, over the course of many, many years, a declining share in -- among Ford, Chrysler and GM in the market share that they've held in this country, in some of the decisions that have been made about the different types of cars to manufacture and the types of cars not to manufacture, I think most people believe what the President said, that the management of the auto companies has been lacking.
In terms of specific changes, I will wait for the President to make a determination and an announcement on that.
Q He said as well that the government would give companies some help, and the auto companies have asked for $22 billion. Is that figure still --
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me save something for the President to do in the intervening days before he goes overseas.
Jake.
Q First, congratulations on your first virtual town hall meeting.
MR. GIBBS: Thank you.
Q Very successful. There were a couple of questions that were on your web site that were not asked that I thought were interesting that I wanted to just get an answer from you here; that they weren't the top vote-getters. One was from Jason in Detroit. He said, "Will we ever see any CEOs go to jail for destroying the economy?" I think that's a question probably a lot of voters wonder about. And then I have one more after that.
MR. GIBBS: I do believe -- I'd have to look up exactly who, but I think there are executives that were part of accounting scandals that are currently serving time in jail, and I know that --
Q You're talking about Arthur Anderson or --
MR. GIBBS: I think -- I don't know if Ken Lay ever went to jail or died before he got there, but I know that executives have been convicted of fraud in the past, and the President and the Justice Department are concerned about financial fraud and have invested resources to ensure that fraud is rooted out, caught, and that people that conduct it are put in jail.
Q Just one more, if you'll indulge me.
MR. GIBBS: Sure.
Q From Peter in Oregon. He said, "I appreciate the efforts of the administration to fix the economy quickly. However, why aren't you giving the American public the chance to review these bills? In your campaign you promised we would have at least five days."
MR. GIBBS: I believe, except for the stimulus bill -- I'll double-check on this --
Q I don't think you've been doing it. I might be wrong. I don't --
MR. GIBBS: I'll check. I think a number of the bills have been up for five days. I'll get exactly -- I think, in fact, on at least a couple of occasions we've not signed bills when we normally planned so that some of them could be reviewed.
Q So that is a commitment the President intends to uphold from now on? Okay.
MR. GIBBS: Yes, sir.
Q The President has been saying the last few days that we're seeing some small steps of progress. You've said similar things. Beyond the housing starts that have jumped like 22 percent, what else? Can you broaden that a little bit to explain what the President is talking about when he says we're seeing some progress?M
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think -- certainly in the area of housing, I think you've seen mortgage rates are down either at their lowest or near their lowest in history because of a lot of factors, including some help from the President's plan that has lowered rates.
There obviously were housing starts. I think you've seen some consumer spending numbers in the past month that were good. There are numbers today that are not as good. There's a further, I think, final revision for GDP in the final quarter of 2008 that shows the -- as the previous number did -- the slowest economic growth in a quarter century. Claims for unemployment insurance are up.
So I think, as the President has said, there will -- while there are glimmers of hope, there is no single answer, and that we're not going to get out of what we got into over a long period of time. We're certainly not going to get out of that overnight.
Q And what kind of trends are you seeing? I mean, from our standpoint, when reports come out, we can see the trends. But are you seeing anything behind the scenes that shows that it's trending up?
MR. GIBBS: Well, the -- I think the question that some economists are asking and the people that look at these numbers, not just in the administration but outside, are wondering if the trend is -- if, in some ways, we're bottoming out; have we stopped the steep descent that we saw certainly earlier in the year. And I'm not sure there's enough data or data points to fully understand that.
You know, the administration assumes that the GDP numbers, when they're ultimately released for the first quarter of this year, are not going to be good. And again, I think the -- that's why the President has sought many forums in the last few weeks to talk to people about what he's seeing in the economy and what he's doing to put the path -- put the country back on a path towards sustained economic growth. That's why he thinks passage of this budget that he's outlined that will make critical investments in health and energy independence and education, while slashing the deficit in half, is part of an economic recovery plan that will make that progress.
But I don't think you'll see the administration get overly excited about any one number because we understand that there are tens -- tens and tens and tens of millions of Americans that are hurting and that the President is doing all he can to make their lives a little bit better.
Helen.
Q Is the President going to explain why he's sending thousands of Americans to kill and die thousands of miles away for -- what is the rationale to expand this war?
MR. GIBBS: Are you talking about Afghanistan?
Q Afghanistan.
MR. GIBBS: I think --
Q And I have another unrelated question.
MR. GIBBS: You've been listening to Major with this whole, like, you ask one and reserve time to ask another. (Laughter.)
Q You seem so generous with everyone else.
MR. GIBBS: I know, it's -- (laughter) -- fair enough.
No, I think the President will outline exactly what our interests are in Afghanistan.
Q What are they?
MR. GIBBS: They are to ensure that those that had a safe haven and plotted attacks on this country on September 11th --
Q Are you talking Afghans who want to kill us?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I'm talking about -- I'm talking about extremists from all over the world that are in Afghanistan or along the border with Afghanistan and Pakistan who, because we have lacked a coordinated and regional strategy, plot against nations of the world even today. I think the President --
Q Do we know why they want to do that?
MR. GIBBS: I'm not entirely sure it's understandable why somebody would want to do what some have done. The President has -- the President will outline what he believes is the best strategy going forward to ensure that those extremists don't -- are not fortunate enough to have a safe haven in those countries and plot additional attacks on this country or on other countries in the world.
Q Is he sure of this?
MR. GIBBS: Is he sure?
Q That they're plotting to --
MR. GIBBS: I think he -- I think -- yes.
Q My other question is, what's the President's stand on the Employee Free Choice Act?
MR. GIBBS: He continues to support the legislation.
Chip.
Q Back to automobiles. In the town hall he said that if they don't make the restructuring changes that he's recommended then -- quote -- "then I'm not willing to have taxpayer money chase after bad money." And I know this question has been asked before, but this is a new day and things have developed. Is bankruptcy now off the table?
MR. GIBBS: Well, again, I'm not going to get ahead of what the President will say. I think to give you a further explanation of what that statement means is similar to what I said earlier, and that is we cannot -- a viable auto industry has to be able to sustain itself, not be sustained by routine injections of taxpayer money. I think that is, as he said, going to require some restructuring and it's going to require that everyone involved give so that we can have the viable auto industry that America deserves.
Q He seemed to me to sound a little frustrated with what the auto industry has come up with so far. Is he a little frustrated with the lack -- with their lack of concessions?
MR. GIBBS: Again, I don't want to get ahead of sort of where the -- of the President's announcement or determination on this. Look, I think that -- I'll split this up, as I did earlier. There's no doubt that, given the economic slowdown that we're experiencing, it's hard if you are -- if you're selling a little more than half of what you did two years, that you're not going to run into problems with your business model. At the same time, as I said earlier, I think there's a frustration on the part of this President and on the part of many Americans that we didn't just get into this situation because of a global economic slowdown; that though the President believes that automakers manufacture cars that Americans want to buy, I think the President also believes that they could manufacture more cars that Americans want to buy; that it's not surprising that some have sought to end different model lines that, driving around in a car that gets 10 miles to the gallon -- 10 miles to a gallon of gas when gas is $4 a gallon. I don't think there's -- I also think there's not a very good business model by which that doesn't cause you problems, as well.
So, look, I think this is a combination of years of failure to plan, as well as -- maybe it's a perform storm of factors like -- such as that, as well as a huge economic slowdown that's seen the demand for the product become much less than it has been in just a couple of years.
Q Have you heard GM express frustration, not publicly but back there, with the failure of auto industry executives to realize how much restructuring is necessary here?
MR. GIBBS: Well, again, I don't want to get into that. I think that -- I think the President has had some frustration with the way the companies have done business for a long time. I think -- he gave a speech in late spring of 2007 about the need to change the way the auto industry works and the need to address some of our problems in energy independence by making cars that were more efficient. And he didn't choose to give that speech in Chicago or in Washington or New York, he chose to give that speech at the economic club in Detroit in front of auto executives.
So I think this is a President that has long challenged the auto industry to do what he believes they can do; that over a series of years we've -- the auto industry and auto executives have made bad decisions, but at the same time he believes there can be a path towards a viable domestic auto industry and that that's what this country needs.
Chuck.
Q A quick follow on Afghanistan. How does the administration describe the war in Afghanistan? I mean, so -- who are we at war with in Afghanistan?
MR. GIBBS: I think we're at war with extremists that seek to do us harm.
Q And those extremists are?
MR. GIBBS: I think a combination of mostly al Qaeda, obviously the Taliban. I would say those are the primary extremists that --
Q And it's a war?
MR. GIBBS: We are currently engaged in a war in that country, yes.
Q Yesterday in an interview with our friend Andrea Mitchell, Secretary of State Clinton said -- about the assault weapons ban -- that while she knew it was a heavy lift politically in Congress, she seemed to think that that's something that needed to be done, saying -- also saying that the United States' demand for drugs and the gun issue is why the United States has some responsibility in the war. So I guess two questions: Does the President concur with the Secretary of State on the assault weapons ban?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think what you saw the administration lay out this week was a comprehensive plan to move millions of dollars in resources and hundreds of personnel to the border region to maintain security and to help the Mexican government in the efforts that President Calderón has undertaken to stamp out the violence of drug cartels, that has resulted in thousands of deaths in Mexico.
The President said in the campaign that he supported that ban. The President also believes that there are many things that can be done, enforcing the current laws on the books of this country, that can stem the tide of illegal guns going south of the border.
Obviously we've got to do a lot to decrease the supply that comes north because of the demand. Like many problems that -- the solutions are not just one, they're multifaceted; that we have to do a lot of different things involving a lot of different departments in order to make progress. And the President would commend the Mexican President for the efforts that he's undertaken to take -- to begin to take those steps.
Q The President agrees with Secretary Clinton on the assault weapons ban?
MR. GIBBS: Chuck, I think I answered your question.
Q But would she -- is the President going to go to Capitol Hill and ask for the assault weapons ban to –
MR. GIBBS: I don't know of any plans to do that.
Q Just one question.
MR. GIBBS: I'll come back to you toward the end, how about that?
Mark.
Q Robert, in the online town meeting, when the President said he doesn't think legalizing marijuana would give the economy a boost, was he giving a political answer or an economic answer? Does he have economic numbers to back that up?
MR. GIBBS: I'm unaware of a CEA analysis -- (laughter) -- regarding that. I think the --
Q Will you let us know if there is one? (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: I think you've heard the President talk about getting us on a path toward sustained economic growth. I don't think he believes that that is a part of that plan.
Q What about medicinal marijuana?
MR. GIBBS: I think the -- I'd point you to the Justice Department on developments on that.
The President asked people to ask their questions. Obviously interests aligned with certain viewpoints did so, and the President wanted to answer the question that, no, it was not -- he did not think a good economic strategy.
Q Did that question get the most votes of any?
MR. GIBBS: I will ask Macon and those guys. It is interesting when -- I think several of those topics were in things like financial stability or --
Q Green jobs.
MR. GIBBS: Green jobs, right. (Laughter.) It's unclear what leap of faith one has to make to ask that question in some of the -- some of those -- right, some of those -- some of those topics.
Q Why did he even bring it up? Why did he even bring it up? I mean, no one asked it online and no one asked it --
MR. GIBBS: No, people -- people asked it online –
Q I mean, no, I know they voted for it, they voted for it. But he brought it up on his own. This is what I'm saying. Why did he even bring --
MR. GIBBS: April, the concept of the virtual town hall meeting was to have people --
Q Transparency?
MR. GIBBS: No, no, let me -- you can ask and I'll answer -- (laughter) -- that the President asked people to go to the web site, ask questions of the administration, vote on which questions they wanted to have the President answer, and that he would do so. And as I said and as Ann said and -- maybe we should have said "clean-energy jobs" -- that would have --
Q You said "green."
MR. GIBBS: Yes, I know. That in some topics -- you know, this is not the first time that an interest group gets on a web site and votes many times for their question to be answered, and the President thought he should answer it and I think he did.
Q But, Robert, he didn't take on the serious issue. He made a joke out of it. I mean, there were a lot of questions about legalization of marijuana, not as a job creation program, but just as a serious policy issue. And with what's happening in Mexico --
MR. GIBBS: It poses the legal -- I'll do this for the President -- I didn't -- I neither emailed my question in, nor voted for it, but the President opposes the legalization of marijuana, and I'd -- I'll say I did that without even the slightest hint of laughter.
Q Can you say why?
Q Robert, while you're on this same subject can we follow up?
MR. GIBBS: Hold on one sec. Hold on.
Q What did the President learn in this? A lot of the questions were things he talks about all the time.
Q Annie, there was a question pending on why -- why he feels that way about legalizing marijuana.
MR. GIBBS: He does not think that that is -- he opposes it. He doesn't think that's the right plan for America.
Q But a follow-up on the process, on the --
MR. GIBBS: Hold on, let me -- I've lost control. (Laughter.) Hold on, what are you -- dammit, you guys don't get to Google this stuff and send in your questions. Hold on, hold on, hold on, let me --
Q I want to shift to the meetings on bankers. Secretary Geithner is meeting with the bank executives, CEOs, tonight, apparently. Can you talk a little bit about the nature of that meeting? It's obviously a forerunner to tomorrow.
MR. GIBBS: I don't know the details of that meeting. I can talk about, as I did yesterday, what the President hopes to get out of this meeting. Obviously, as he said and as I said yesterday, that Wall Street and Main Street, all of us are in the same boat, we're all in this together; that the President I think will talk about what the Secretary of Treasury has talked about this week in financial regulatory reform and in the tools to deal with systemic risk and systemic failure in our financial system.
I think the President looks forward to getting an update from them on what precisely they're seeing in the economy on real-estate commercial loans. And obviously they'll talk about stuff that's been in the news for -- over the past several weeks, get into compensation and bonuses and excesses like that, and the notion that we are -- we have to change the culture of the way Wall Street works.
Q I wanted to ask you about the culture. He's expressed a degree of anger over Wall Street and bankers generally over the last few weeks. Is he going to maintain that, tell them privately what he's really thinking?
MR. GIBBS: I will tell you, Roger, the President isn't going to say one thing out here and a different thing in there. He'll go through the agenda that I just talked to you about and -- but again, we're not going to get out of this financial crisis and we're not going to stabilize our financial system without healthy banks. That's part of what he hopes to talk to them about tomorrow.
Major.
Q Just two questions. (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: You couldn't ask three with Helen only asking two, right?
Q First of all, on Afghanistan, a conceptual question -- because obviously you've been part of some of the dialogue internally on this. There are folks who are in Congress, who are analysts, who have looked at the situation, many have written about it, who wonder or fear if Afghanistan could be a Vietnam-type situation for this President. To the degree -- I'd like to ask you, conceptually, how much has that been a part of the discussion? And has the President reached a conclusion? I presume he has. To what degree does he have any anxiety about this conflict, this part of the world, this culture, becoming a trap for him, as Vietnam did for Lyndon Johnson?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I have not heard the direct analogy like that in the meetings I've been in. Obviously this has been a region of the world, in particular a country that has vexed policymakers for a long, long, long time. And, look, I think even if you go back to the beginning of what was started at the -- toward the end of 2001 -- I think the President asked the team here at the White House and within his administration to conduct a review and to base that review not simply on a strategy for one country and one -- in one place, but to, for the first time, take a regional approach to the problem in understanding that a regional approach is what's needed to solve some of the problems.
Obviously, it is hard to -- I don't think it's a coincidence that it's the Afghanistan-Pakistan review, because I think you'll hear the President talk about how progress in one is also determined by stability and progress in another. And I haven't heard the direct analogy, but I know that the President has been concerned.
Q That concept that it can be -- that no amount of additional effort, no amount of coordination can be sufficient?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the President believes that the strategy that he'll outline gives America the best ability to deal with the threats that are there and to make progress in a very dangerous part of the world. And I think that's what he'll outline tomorrow.
Q On the budget, House Republicans unveiled what they described today as their alternative to the President's budget. I wonder if anyone here has had a chance to brief you on that -- if you're aware that it doesn't actually contain any numbers.
MR. GIBBS: I did -- it took me several minutes to read it. (Laughter.)
Q You took away his punchline.
MR. GIBBS: I will note that there are -- there's one more picture of a windmill than there is of a chart of numbers. There's, just for your knowledge, there's exactly one picture of a windmill. It is -- it's interesting to have a budget that doesn't contain any numbers.
I think the party of "no" has become the party of "no new ideas." The rhetoric inside the budget seems to be a road map for the failed policies that got us into this mess -- to extend trillions and trillions of dollars of tax cuts for the wealthy, continued subsidies for big oil -- and I think it's -- it takes us back to where we've been and why we're in this problem.
I'm glad they -- I think the administration is glad that the Republicans heard the President's call to submit an alternative. We just hope that next time it will contain actual numbers so somebody can evaluate what it means.
Sheryl.
Q Robert, since everyone is getting a couple of questions, I'll have a couple. First, the party of No has become the party of new ideas. Is that --
MR. GIBBS: "No new ideas."
Q "No new ideas." Is that changing the tone in Washington?
MR. GIBBS: Well, yes. (Laughter.) Sure.
Q How is that?
MR. GIBBS: Look, this is a -- the Republicans have asked for and the President has asked for ideas on how to -- how we put our country back on a sustainable path toward fiscal responsibility.
Sheryl, I think if I intoned to you that I would produce a 20-page document that outlined my budget priorities, that it might actually contain a chart with some numbers. I don't think that's a whole lot to ask. I think it is --
Q And the President doesn't think that's a whole lot to ask, either? And he's disappointed in this, too?
MR. GIBBS: Absolutely. I think that -- again -- well, let me ask you this question: How would you compare our budget deficit in fiscal year 2011 with theirs?
Q I'm not the Press Secretary, Robert.
MR. GIBBS: I understand.
Q You're the one answering the questions.
MR. GIBBS: Well, I understand, but let me --
Q Why don't you answer it?
MR. GIBBS: I will answer it.
Q And then ask it and then answer it. (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: Sure, we'll play the Jeopardy! version of a Robert Gibbs briefing.
Q This is the way you'd rather do it anyway. (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: Actually --
Q Now you do have control.
MR. GIBBS: Actually, it is. (Laughter.) If I could have like a piece of glass right here, and this would be --
Q Why don't we call it a unilateral press conference?
Q Now you do have control.
MR. GIBBS: Exactly. This is sort of what I had in mind.
Q Bill might have a question. (Laughter.)
MR. GIBBS: No, but the reason that you can't compare budget deficits and the progress that we're making on cutting the deficit in half is because there are no numbers with which to compare it.
I guess it's no wonder that over the course of many years, budget deficits in this town and debts ballooned because a group of individuals think that you can have a budget that doesn't contain numbers. No wonder we have a inherited budget deficit of $1.3 trillion and a debt that's out of control.
Q Okay, now along another question, the bankers -- the President needs their support in the plans that Secretary Geithner announced this week. So to what extent will he use this meeting tomorrow to maybe exercise his powers of persuasion, to get the financial industry on board with some of these plans buying up the toxic assets and also the regulatory goals that the Secretary outlined?
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me take -- let me separate those for a second, because some of the regulatory goals that the Secretary outlined, the administration strongly believes have to be instituted in order to change the rules of the road and ensure that we have all the necessary tools to protect the taxpayers and do what is needed if our financial system is confronted with systemic threats.
We've talked a couple of times this week about the need to have the ability to resolve institutions that threaten systemically our financial stability without using the tool of bankruptcy, or if they're a bank not using the tools of the FDIC.
So I think obviously the President will talk about in broad terms regulatory reform and changing the rules of the road that will protect taxpayers and protect our economy. I'm sure that the President will talk about the Treasury's plan.
I think the most persuasive part of the plan is that, in the plan is built in an incentive for -- an incentive for banks to get off their balance sheets toxic assets. I think that there's also an incentive for the use of public and private money to rid those assets so that healthy banks can do what we want and need them to do, which is loan money to families and businesses so that people can buy houses, can buy cars, can meet payroll. I don't doubt that it will come up in the meeting, but that's not the point of the meeting.
Yes, sir.
Q On North Korea and the impending rocket launch, is the President as alarmed as some others have said? Does he believe the North Koreans are really going to launch a satellite or does he think that really this is a missile test?
MR. GIBBS: I don't want to get into the motivations, except to say that we believe that such a launch would be provocative and that such a launch would be in violation of U.N. Security Council resolutions. We continue to maintain the goal of a denuclearized North Korea and look to working with our allies to ensure that that happens.
Q And he believes that this is in fact a missile launch, and if he believes it's a threat, does he want U.S. forces to attempt to shoot it down?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I -- I'm not going to engage in diplomacy here, except to reiterate that we believe that any action would be provocative and in violation of the U.N. Security Council.
Ann.
Q Just to return to the town hall one more time, what did he learn?
MR. GIBBS: I think he continues to learn the -- and I think he continues to want to hear from the American people about what's most on their mind. That's why he's asked us to ensure that he travels regularly. This, as I mentioned yesterday, was the ability to have that town hall without gassing up the plane. That's why he's asked that we pull letters for him each day to hear directly from the American people.
Q But there's nothing specific today that caught him unaware.
MR. GIBBS: I have not talked to him specifically about what he might have learned. I think he continues to understand that whether it's health care or jobs or education that we have to make the investments, and what he's outlined in his budget are important in ensuring long-term economic recovery. I think he's long understood, obviously, that the American people are hurting and I think this provides another opportunity, like the press conference did on Tuesday, to provide the American people with an update on what's going on.
Q Will he do it again?
MR. GIBBS: Yes.
Q How soon?
MR. GIBBS: That's a good question. I don't know.
Yes, sir.
Q Robert, it's very clear in this latest economic downturn that we are now living in a borderless global economy. When the President goes to London, what promises or commitments will he be asking his partners in the G20 in terms of supporting a reinvention, really, a revitalization of the world economy?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think -- obviously there are a few things we know will be on the map. We know that there will be discussions about how to change the rules of the road that I talked about here and that Secretary Geithner outlined in front of Congress today, as the beginning of a process of changing the way business is done, literally. Obviously we are going to talk about -- and have talked to many of our G20 partners about ways to ensure that as the recession continues and we've seen a dramatic decrease in exports, that we do what we can to ensure that, particularly in developing countries, that they continue to have what they need, and access to and demand for exports in our country and around the world that create jobs here at home and abroad.
And I also think that -- well, I think they'll talk about that. I think they'll also talk about what individual countries are doing to stimulate their own economies.
Q And just -- will there be a concerted effort to bring some of these regulations on the same page so they're working together, especially with these --
MR. GIBBS: I don't know if you'll have one uniform -- I do believe that everyone recognizes that the risks to our financial system that got us into this mess, that we have to create rules that prevent that from happening again. And I think that what Secretary Geithner outlined today dealing with systemic risk is a good start to a long process here in America to ensure that that happens.
John.
Q Thanks, Robert. You said from the podium a couple minutes ago that interest groups drove up the questions on the web site about marijuana. But the President and Secretary of State have also said in recent days that demand domestically is driving the problems on the border. You seem to be contradicting yourself a little bit and trying to say that the web site issue was an interest group issue, but --
MR. GIBBS: Well, I say that largely because this isn't the first time we've asked people to email questions in and --
Q What is it? I mean --
MR. GIBBS: -- surprisingly, this always rises to the top.
Q Right, but what is it? I mean, do you -- does the White House think that this is a major issue on the minds of the American people? Obviously you think demand is high.
MR. GIBBS: Well, no, no, I didn't say that -- no, and I think -- I don't disagree at all with what -- the administration doesn't disagree at all with what the Secretary of State said.
Again, I think, like I said, this isn't the first time that we've asked for questions and found that certain questions are -- always rise to the top. I think it's not a stretch to believe that this might not fall under, say, financial stability or green jobs.
Q Okay, so what is the administration going to do to drive down demand?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that one of the things that we've certainly talked about, the administration and Justice has talked about, and I think there's money in either recovery or the budget for increased treatment and prevention. Obviously we've moved resources to the border to stop the flow northbound of drugs. There are, as Secretary Napolitano outlined, steps that we're taking to ensure, for instance, that rail cars are inspected 100 percent to drive down that demand. But, obviously, this is going to take a coordinated effort through drug courts and treatment and prevention in order to ensure that the rising, or sustained, demand is -- that we take action to stop that.
Q Thank you, Robert.
MR. GIBBS: Yes, sir.
Q Thank you very much. What is the President's reaction to the 50,000 people already who have signed petitions joining the Catholic bishop of Fort Wayne-South Bend, and objecting to his addressing the graduation and receiving an honorary degree from Notre Dame?
MR. GIBBS: The President obviously believes in everyone's right to get involved and to exercise their opinion. And he's met with -- I think met last week with Cardinal George and others to discuss topics that he's interested in, and the Catholic Church is interested in again. And he looks forward to continuing that dialogue in the lead-up to the commencement, and looks forward to delivering the address in May.
Thank you.
Q Robert, can you say the President is the people's President, since he's engaged with the commons?
MR. GIBBS: Absolutely.
Q Thank you, sir.
END 
3:16 P.M. EDT
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3-27-09
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
_________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                     March 27, 2009

PRESS BRIEFING 
BY PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
2:05 P.M. EDT
Q Thanks for the warning.
MR. GIBBS: Are your ready? Do you want me to go back out?
Q Seriously --
MR. GIBBS: Well, I wanted to go talk to the President and get his thoughts on the bankers meeting. So I apologize for --
Q I know, but it happens every day. I don't want to be like a big showdown, but it irritates everybody here. If you could just be on time or give us better warning.
Q You just gave us a two-minute warning. You guys gave us a two-minute warning -- that's why we all came out.
MR. GIBBS: Okay, well, my apologies. I was in talking to the President. So I apologize for the inconvenience.
Let me start with a couple of announcements and I'll give you a rundown of the President's thoughts on the meeting that he just finished.
As you all know, the Vice President arrived today for a four-day trip to South and Central America, to consult with Latin American leaders gathered in Chile and Costa Rica to discuss the upcoming Summit of the Americas. He's on the trip with Dr. Jill Biden.
In Chile, the Vice President will attend the Progressive Governance Conference with several Latin American and European heads of state, and hold bilateral meetings with leaders. In Costa Rica, the Vice President will hold a bilateral meeting with the President before participating in a multilateral meeting with Central American leaders. He returns to Washington, D.C. late Monday evening.
Secondly, let me give you just a quick rundown on the situation in North Dakota and in Minnesota. The White House is actively monitoring the impacts of the flooding in North Dakota and Minnesota. As you know, the President approved a major disaster declaration for the state of North Dakota on March 24th, and last night the President approved an emergency declaration for the state of Minnesota.
On the ground, the federal government continues to actively coordinate with state and local governments in both states to address the ongoing flood fight. This effort has been underway since late last week. FEMA, the Army Corps of Engineers, the Coast Guard, the National Guard, and other federal agencies, as well as the American Red Cross, have been -- continue the actively work with these officials to ensure their needs are being met.
Federal support is being provided up and down the Red River. Nancy Ward, the Acting FEMA Administrator, is on the ground currently in Fargo, and directly talking with federal, state and local officials to ensure that federal assistance is provided to support the response to the flooding. The President this morning talked with Governor Hoeven, Governor Pawlenty, and Fargo Mayor Dennis Walaker today to discuss his concern for the residents of North Dakota and Minnesota, and to ensure that the states are getting the federal assistance they need to supplement any state and local efforts. Secretary Napolitano has been in contact with state and local officials to express her support, and she also briefed the President this morning on the latest developments.
This is important -- we cannot reinforce enough the importance for residents in both states remain vigilant in monitoring the reports of flood crests and to follow the instructions from their state and local leaders in the event that evacuations in their local areas become necessary.
And again, the President continues to be impressed with ongoing efforts of thousands of volunteers as they continue to work to protect their community.
And then, lastly, let me just give you a quick rundown of the President's thoughts about the meeting that just concluded with the bankers. The President believed they had a good, productive and frank conversation. The President opened up by talking about the importance of dealing with toxic assets and getting banks lending again. There was a discussion about the President's and the administration's plan to deal with housing that many of the bankers discussed positively.
There was next a discussion about regulatory reform, and it's fair to say that they agreed on the need to update the framework of regulation and that being important. Also discussed were issues of compensation and the importance of recognizing what the American public is going through in this economic crisis. The President emphasized that Wall Street needs Main Street, and that Main Street needs Wall Street; that everybody has to pitch in; that we're all in this together.
Overall, the President was very pleased about the meeting; continued to stress the need for open lines off communication, and also to stress that there was no agenda -- he had no agenda beyond working to get a solution -- the right solution for our financial system and to get it stabilized and working again for the American people.
And with that --
Q Thank you, Robert. This morning when the President talked about Afghanistan and Pakistan, the only cost he talked about was the Kerry-Lugar bill, which just deals with Pakistan civilian projects. What can the American people expect this initiative to cost, and are you confident that the Congress will go along with the cost?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the budget itself is being readied. I don't have an exact increase in monthly operational costs. I think that everybody understands the importance of getting this effort right; that a regional approach that addresses the safety and security of the two countries and of the United States, and working together to ensure that what happened on September 11th doesn't happen again.
Obviously, it's all -- it's going to cost money, and we're asking for a renewed commitment from the American people, and certainly both the men and women in uniform that will serve, as well as an increased number of civilians that will go over to demonstrate all elements of our national power. But as the President said, it is a goal that -- to disrupt, dismantle and defeat al Qaeda. And that's something that we can't afford not to do.
Q Any idea how soon you might have some estimates of the --
MR. GIBBS: I don't. I can certainly check.
Q On the bankers meeting, how strongly did the President press the bankers to sell their toxic assets through the Geithner program? As you know, a lot of them are reluctant to sell them at these prices, hoping that when the economy recovers they can get a better price, and that won't solve the problem.
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think there was a broad discussion about the program. Obviously, as I talked about a couple times this week, and many people have talked about the need for the financial system to be stabilized by getting a lot of these toxic assets off the balance sheets of bankers, and that because of that, there's an incentive through the market to get a price that's established that works for both investors and for those that want to rid their balance sheets of these assets.
So I think the policy is structured so that there is that incentive, and obviously the President believes that -- and I think the bankers said after the meeting -- that what they've heard is a positive first step.
Q But the incentives for the taxpayers are different than the incentives for the bankers. They want the highest possible price --
MR. GIBBS: Well, again, I think -- you know, obviously there's -- and one of the reasons that many, many months ago under Secretary Paulson, the theory was that you might not be able to get this worked because you had -- you lacked an incentive to change something that somebody might value at 95 cents on a dollar and someone might value at 25 cents on a dollar.
Obviously we believe that because of the way the plan is structured, there is an incentive that protects the taxpayers but also gives incentives for banks to want to move those assets off their balance sheets by not totally giving up on them.
Q And what did they say about his message on compensation? Were they receptive to that?
MR. GIBBS: Well, yes, I -- look, I think, and, again, I think as you heard the bankers say, they understand that. I think --
Q They said you didn't talk about it.
Q They said it didn't come up.
MR. GIBBS: I did not hear that. It was discussed.
Q -- said it didn't come up.
MR. GIBBS: It was discussed.
Q Were you in there?
MR. GIBBS: No, Jen was, but I also talked to the President about it.
Yes, Jake.
Q I actually want to follow up on both their points. On Afghanistan, you said that the mission is to disrupt, destroy, et cetera. Other than the new troops, the new commitment of troops, 21,000 more troops, how -- what are the specific ways that this policy is different from the Bush administration policy?
MR. GIBBS: Sure. Well, I think -- I'll pick on several different points, and I'll take you back a little bit and give a little bit broader -- as you well know, the President originally believed that the decision to go into Iraq took the focus and resources away from our effort in Afghanistan; and that today's decision and announcement refocuses on that region of the world where what the President believes is our primary security threat.
It does so with a more tightly focused goal that the President enumerated, with a substantial effort at ensuring that the resources that are needed to achieve those goals are brought to the region, not just in, as you mentioned, the expansion of both combat groups and trainers, but also, as you heard officials talk about, an increase in civilians, in development; that -- I think another thing that builds on the civilian part of this is using all elements of our national power through both -- through those civilian agencies and through diplomacy; that we're looking at this, again, as the President talked about, not as an Afghanistan issue but as an Afghanistan and Pakistan issue.
And obviously the President will do more of this in the coming days as we go overseas, drawing on an international effort to ensure that we continue to put an emphasis in resources in this region of the world.
Q And to follow up on Karen's question, some of the bank -- bank CEOS came out and said that they liked the first -- their first impressions of Geithner's plan to get the toxic assets off the books, but they're waiting for more details. What more details could they possibly be waiting for?
MR. GIBBS: I think that's a better question for them. I don't know the answer to that.
Q Are there more -- I guess the better question for you is, are there more details that you guys are set to introduce?
MR. GIBBS: I think maybe what they're talking about is just the logistics of asset auctions and things like that. But I can certainly check with Treasury -- I mean, obviously, there will be an effort from -- between now and when that happens that we'll roll out plans and details on that. But I'll check specifically with Treasury on that one.
Helen.
Q What proof does the President have to become so hawkish now and to raise the ante on the troop level going in? We were misled so much on Iraq. Why shouldn't we be misled again?
MR. GIBBS: Well, regrettably I think in 2001 we learned the danger of giving extremists that hope and wish us harm the space in a safe haven to plan, practice, coordinate and ultimately execute deadly attacks on this country.
Q Can you prove it? I mean, why don't the American people get more evidence?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I -- one, I think the American --
Q You're going back to 2001.
MR. GIBBS: Well, no, I'm using 2001 as certainly one example, obviously a fairly poignant one. But I think it is -- without getting into details that I can't get into, when the President talks about continuing to get assessments on just how dangerous this part of the world is, I think they can be assured that this region of the world presents many dangers for this country. I think this region of the world poses dangers for Afghanistan. And, look, regrettably, just today, we can see that the extremists in this area pose a danger to Pakistan.
The leader of Pakistan is in power because the leader before was assassinated. I forget the exact number of people that were killed today in a bomb blast. I think there's very credible evidence that the threat exists and that the President will do all in his power to protect the American people.
Q Are they wrong to not want us there?
MR. GIBBS: Is who wrong?
Q The Afghans.
MR. GIBBS: Again, we're there to ensure that al Qaeda and its affiliates don't create a safe haven and don't topple the Afghan government and ultimately use that space to plan and execute those attacks. The President obviously has spoken with leaders of both Afghanistan and Pakistan, and they understand why we're there.
Dan.
Q The President really had the focus, in terms of the threat, on Pakistan. And we see the buildup, the troop buildup, for Afghanistan. But what is the U.S. planning to do to go after this threat? If the terrorists are hiding out and currently planning to strike us, what is being done to cut that off?
MR. GIBBS: In Pakistan?
Q In Pakistan.
MR. GIBBS: Well, I'm not going to get into operational details --
Q Is there something being done?
MR. GIBBS: Is there something being done --
Q To go after the threat in Pakistan? Because there's $5 billion a year in humanitarian, but nothing -- we haven't heard anything at all about some active engagement to go after that threat if we know the threat is there.
MR. GIBBS: I think it would be wise for us not to lay out in front of the world the plan -- that plan of attack.
Q Well, I'm not looking for the plans. Is there something that is ongoing to go after that threat? Because he stated the threat is there; they're planning to attack us.
MR. GIBBS: I think you can be very assured that we're taking the steps necessary to address the threat and to protect the American people.
Q In terms of the timeline, no timeline to extract troops out of Afghanistan. The President I believe in the past has talked about wanting to have a timeline. Why no timeline? Why not sort of set some sort of mark and say, we need to be out by this time?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the President did state quite clearly that the policy would be reviewed and evaluated as we go. Obviously if you add in the increase in the number of troops that were added in -- before the President took office, in addition to the 17,000 that the President ordered previously, and the 4,000 trainers today, you're looking at an expansion of roughly 30,000 American troops.
So we have important elections coming up in Afghanistan in a deteriorating security situation, and I think -- first of all, I think the President wants to evaluate what -- and the security team want to evaluate what that increase means for the situation in the region. Obviously the announcement today is to build the capacity of the Afghan army to ensure that ultimately that responsibility of rooting out extremism and protecting the democratically elected government can be done by the Afghans. And also the President will look to evaluate the policy as we move forward as we increase our diplomacy, as we increase the number of civilians that are there to do what the President talked about in terms of the delivery of services without corruption, and for developmental aid.
And so I think that the President will have said and set forward -- and I think you guys heard last night about a flexible strategy that allows the team to evaluate whether the goals are being met and whether the benchmarks are being met, so that we can determine the progress toward making that region of the world safe and stable.
Chuck.
Q Quick bank clarification: Did the issue of timing of returning the TARP money come up at the meeting --
MR. GIBBS: I believe it did. The President and I did not specifically talk about that.
Q So you don't know whether -- what was said, you just know the subject was talked about?
MR. GIBBS: I know the subject came up. I can check with him and see what --
Q Okay. Two unrelated questions here -- everything that's been going on here today. The FAA apparently is not going to -- apparently the FAA is being pressured not to release publicly incidents that have to do -- where incidents occur, whether these bird -- where birds hit planes and what caused the crash on the Hudson, because airlines don't want to give the information -- I mean, isn't this a public safety issue? Shouldn't the government sort of demand that this information be public?
MR. GIBBS: I saw a blurb on it, I read part of it. I would direct you to the FAA on that. I don't have anything on that.
Q Don't have anything?
MR. GIBBS: I don't have anything on that.
Q And it's also our understanding that the President met with some 9/11 families yesterday, this week.
MR. GIBBS: I don't -- I will check on that.
Q Some 9/11 families have asked him about -- had asked the President to get involved with the rebuilding at Ground Zero and some of the delays?
MR. GIBBS: I will check on that. That is not on my stuff, either, but I will have somebody work on that.
Q Following up on Dan's question about the timetable, Robert, would it be accurate to call the military presence there open-ended?
MR. GIBBS: Again, I think the President has set forth a new regional strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan that he looks to monitor closely and assure -- to assure that we are making progress and to use benchmarks to measure that progress.
I think any conflict -- I don't think any conflict is open-ended. I don't think the President would see it that way. I think the President believes we're setting forth the best strategy that we need to achieve more tightly focused goals of disrupting and destroying al Qaeda; of doing it through the -- with the resources that are needed to get that done in a regional way, using all elements of our national power.
Q Throughout the discussions, have you heard anyone mention any date of when this -- when the troops might come home?
MR. GIBBS: Well, no, I've -- I think they're focused on initially -- obviously there -- as I said, there have been decisions by the previous President and by this President to greatly increase the troop presence. That presence will be evaluated. We have -- we will begin moving an increased amount of civilian personnel in there to more greatly focus, as I said, on the delivery of basic governmental services, on developmental aid that the President talked about in both countries, as well as trainers to ensure that we are making the sustained progress that has to be made and needs to be made to give the responsibility for security back to the Afghans.
Q Has the notion of or concern about mission creep come up?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think that's always discussed. I mean, I think that -- I think in any decision that is made, you want to ensure that, and I think the President did through enumerating that tightly focused goal -- and that that can be evaluated through benchmarks to measure that progress, to evaluate the policy, and to make the necessary changes. So I think there's -- there's a refocusing. There are -- it's goal-oriented; it's resourced; it's regional. It uses all elements of our power and it will be evaluated each step of the way.
Jonathan.
Q A number of those bank CEOs have spoken out publically against the bonus tax legislation both in the House and the Senate. And I'm wondering if that came up in that compensation conversation and what did the President offer them by way of assurances?
MR. GIBBS: That was not something the President and I talked about, but I'll check on that, as well.
Yes, sir.
Q One of the things the President wanted to get out of this meeting also was an update on the economy. What did he hear from them on the economy?
MR. GIBBS: Well, one of the -- and I think you heard some of the CEOs at the stakeout talk about this -- one of the things that they spent some time talking about and that I think is a positive development is the administration's housing plan; that rate -- mortgage finance rates have hit a low -- are at their lowest point since they began recording statistics, I believe, in 1971; that millions are taking advantage of the ability to refinance their home; that banks are adding people to their employment rolls in order to process those refinancing.
So I think largely the review that the President got is not a ton different than what he's given you and what I've given you, that there are -- that we're still facing a lot of tough challenges; these are unprecedented times. There are figures here and there that demonstrate good news -- spending figures today, the discussion of the housing plan. But obviously all the people in that room recognized that we have quite a long ways to go.
Q Did they make or suggest -- just as a follow-up -- did they make or suggest anything else that the administration could do to accelerate a recovery?
MR. GIBBS: I will check on that.
Yes, sir.
Q Robert, could you go over the numbers, the goals, on training Afghanistan military and police where they are now and where you're headed?
MR. GIBBS: I don't have those numbers in front of me, but I will get those to you. But I think some were in the President's speech and I think some have been in briefings that we've given either today or --
Q They were, but there is some confusion in some other agencies about the exact numbers, so I just thought --
MR. GIBBS: We will get that.
Q One other question for you. In the President's speech he talks about aid and military assistance to Pakistan, but says we're not going to give them a blank check; and then goes on to say that when there is -- that we expect them to take action against extremists within their borders, and when there is intelligence on high-level extremists, we expect action to be taken. He makes it sound as if there is a condition for aid, and that if action is not taken, that aid might be withdrawn.
MR. GIBBS: I think what the President's larger message is, as we refocus on policy, as we draw into that regional aspect, that we have to think about how we're doing this differently; that we have to work with both the Afghans and the Pakistanis achieving those goals and those benchmarks; and also, to understand, as I said earlier, that the extremists in those countries don't just pose a threat to our country -- they do -- but they also pose a threat to both Afghanistan and to the Pakistani people.
Again, the current government is there because of the killing of the past leader, and the country remains -- as evidenced today, still struggles for peace and security. And the President believes that one of the things that we have to do in this policy is convince others that the threat is not simply to us but also to them and their democratically elected government.
Q But he also said, "We will also insist that action be taken one way or another." Does that suggest that if the Pakistanis do not act, others will have to?
MR. GIBBS: I think that's a reasonable reading of that, and I think it's consistent with the President's policies and what he said throughout the campaign.
Jon.
Q I just had a question on the issue of the low interest rates, because on the other end that, potentially, is inflation. Is that something that the President is talking about with his economic advisors?
MR. GIBBS: I think they've both talked about the worries about inflation and deflation, given different statistics at different times. Absolutely they've talked about it in the daily briefings that the President gets from his economic team.
Q Can I also ask you about the bankers? Because in his statements before the meeting, the President was talking about how everybody needs to do what's best for, I guess, the global national community -- I don't remember the exact wording, but that was the tone. Just trying to get inside his head. As he's talking to them about selling these bad assets off the books, was there any appeal to not get rid of incentive for profit but maybe not try to go as far as possible to get the highest profit? Was that part of his argument at all?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think inherent in the discussions that he's had with them, inherent in what Secretary Geithner has proposed in terms of new rules of the road, and inherent in his discussions about changing the culture of Wall Street is understanding that while nobody in this country begrudges somebody doing well and somebody taking risk, and using their money to make more money, I think he emphasized to them why it would be frustrating if you're a family struggling to make a mortgage payment each month and pay your health insurance if you're lucky enough to have it -- why it would be frustrating to see an executive get a huge paycheck or a bonus when they work for an institution that needs extraordinary help from the government.
I think that's in some ways why the President put in place in February and announced stricter -- strict rules and regulations about executive compensation at banks that do receive that extraordinary help. And I do think there's a -- there's, rightly so, a message of this notion that we are all in this together. As I said and as the President said directly to me, that Wall Street needs Main Street; Main Street needs Wall Street; and that only working together and only solving the problem for both will we eventually get our economy back on track and make progress.
Q Do you know if he tied that in to how they'll approach the toxic asset --
MR. GIBBS: I don't know that. I can check specifically on that.
Sheryl.
Q Robert, looking ahead to Monday, the President is slated to make an announcement on the automakers. He said yesterday, we will provide them some help, but they will have to make drastic changes. Has he already made a decision about what kind of help he's going to provide them, and will it be short-term help or long term? Will it be all that they asked for? Will there be conditions?
MR. GIBBS: I know there were at least two meetings with him yesterday on this, but I know the President's Auto Task Force is meeting today. I think they are winding down the decisions that have to be made and putting in place a plan that the President will announce on Monday. But I don't want to get into that announcement until then.
Q Can you just talk about -- in terms of his announcement, will it be a very short-term announcement, or will he outline sort of a longer vision for where he sees the companies headed? Because he seemed to hint -- he did say yesterday it's not going to be like the 1950s where we see this growth; they're going to have to look different in a new global economy.
MR. GIBBS: And I think that is what the President will discuss. I think what the President has talked about throughout this process is the need for a viable American auto industry, but that that viability is largely going to depend on a restructuring that allows it to compete in a very changed global economic environment, and to do so without continued government assistance.
And, look, as I talked about yesterday, this is -- obviously we've all watched and the President has certainly watched management decisions that have been made over a longer course of time that have seen companies fail to invest in technologies and efficiencies that would have created a broader group of cars that they sell that could do well in good times and in bad.
The auto industry also, in all frankness, suffers, as I said yesterday, from the sheer notion of competing in an environment where they're selling a little more than half of what they sold two years ago. The annualized car sales at this point look like we're on pace for the industry itself to sell about 9 million cars in this country, and that's down a couple of years ago from 16 million. I think any industry would be faced with some very difficult decisions if, regardless of what your product line was, you were selling a little more than half of what you were selling in more robust times.
So the President I think will outline what he thinks is the best way forward to achieve viability for the companies in both that short term and in the long term. How do these companies get through the global recession that sees a great decrease in demand for the product? And how, when we emerge from recession to recovery, how do we have a sustainable path that makes good business decisions not just for one year but for many years?
Q How is he going announce it?
MR. GIBBS: Somewhere over here.
Q Will it be a speech?
MR. GIBBS: Yes, speech or announcement, something like that.
Q Robert.
MR. GIBBS: Yes, sir.
Q On the Europe trip, can you talk a bit about what the President's standard for success is? What is he trying to accomplish, substantively and symbolically? And what message is he trying to broadcast to the world?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the message -- let me take the second part first -- the message that he brings is that Europe and the G20 have, in America, a partner willing to work for success in moving the economy forward, in getting the economy back on its feet and recovered, as well as instituting stricter regulation to ensure that we don't face these problems again. And obviously, the latter part of the trip he'll talk about the shared responsibilities for security that we all have in dealing with the region of the world that he talked about today.
We'll have more on this I think tomorrow when -- I think sometime tomorrow morning we're going to do a background briefing call for you guys on the schedule and what you'll expect.
Q Is that going to be on the record -- the background briefing? Can we have it on the record?
MR. GIBBS: I have no idea, to be honest with you.
Q Is it a conference call, or here?
MR. GIBBS: I think we'll do it both here, and for those that don't want to be here at, like, 10:00 a.m. in the morning can also join on the phone. We're a full-service outfit.
Q This will be on the record, right?
MR. GIBBS: Honestly, you're, like, two hours ahead of me. But we'll endeavor to get you what you need.
Q You're supposed to be ahead of us.
MR. GIBBS: You know, I tried -- I stopped trying to be ahead of you guys at, like, day 50. (Laughter.)
Yes, sir.
Q I'd like to follow up on Turkey. What is the purpose of the trip to Turkey? He's spending two days there. And what are his aims in Turkey?
MR. GIBBS: Well, let me not get ahead of what we're doing, in terms of talking about the schedule, but we'll have more for you on that tomorrow morning.
Kirk.
Q Thanks, Robert. The House is poised to include reconciliation in its budget. Has the President discussed that with Speaker Pelosi?
MR. GIBBS: Not that I'm aware of, no.
Q Does he have any views on that?
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think his main view on this and the view that I've enunciated from here is that there seems to be a lot of consternation about what could happen months down the line when the best way to be involved in discussing, whether it's health care or anything else, is to take active part in an introduction of ideas as the polices are all being created. I think that's the -- the best way to be involved in the policy process if you're a Democrat or a Republican is through the notion that it's going on right now.
Q And in an unrelated -- I mean, in a separate topic -- immigration -- is that a priority this year, and should the Congress take the initiative on that, or will the White House in terms of --
MR. GIBBS: Well, I think the President has talked about that it is a priority and I think the only way that's going to get done is by everybody working together.
Q Thank you, Robert.
MR. GIBBS: Yes, sir.
Q The Turkey trip -- is that stop -- the President made the promise of speaking in a Muslim country within 100 days -- is that it, or is there going to be another country?
MR. GIBBS: That's not the speech that he talked about.
Q It's not the speech?
MR. GIBBS: It's not.
Q -- expect him to go to a Muslim country within 100 days?
MR. GIBBS: It's not the speech.
Thanks, guys.
Q Can you react to one thing?
MR. GIBBS: Yes, sir.
Q DNI Blair in a briefing yesterday said if we're going to release Gitmo prisoners into the United States, we're going to have to do something to help them establish a new life; that there might have to be some conditions on them. Do you know anything about plans -- what would happen if we were to release Gitmo prisoners --
MR. GIBBS: I'd have to look at what Blair said about that. I don't have it.
Q Can we get just like the four-day ahead, since we know he goes --
MR. GIBBS: Well, the President will be here for an announcement Monday.
Q A.M. or P.M.?
MR. GIBBS: I believe A.M. There may also be a bill signing later in the day. And then Tuesday -- I think the press plane leaves Monday night -- I don't want to leave you guys out of this. The President is wheels up from Andrews I believe at 8:00 a.m. on Tuesday for our European vacation. (Laughter.)
Q And this weekend?
MR. GIBBS: The President is going to leave later this evening to go see Michelle and the girls as they finish Spring Break at Camp David.
Q Will there be a briefing on Monday?
MR. GIBBS: Yes.
Q How long has his family been up there?
MR. GIBBS: All week.
Q Do you anticipate the President coming back Sunday morning, Sunday evening?
MR. GIBBS: I think they're coming back Sunday afternoon, but I will -- I'm pretty sure there are meetings, that he has meetings here in the afternoon on Sunday.
Q And you'll brief on Monday?
MR. GIBBS: Yes.
END 
2:47 P.M. EDT
Briefing by White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs, 3/30/09
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
__________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                              March 30, 2009

PRESS BRIEFING
BY
PRESS SECRETARY ROBERT GIBBS
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
12:53 P.M. EDT

MR. GIBBS:  Good afternoon.  Settle down.  Settle down.  I just wanted to say that.

Q    Major had an idea -- we were all going to wait 10 minutes, give you the two-minute warning -- (laughter.)

MR. GIBBS:  I do notice that class has started a little early today, and not everybody is in their seats.  (Laughter.)

Q    We trusted the two-minute warning.  (Laughter.)

MR. GIBBS:  See?  Yes.  A little fiendish of me to actually abide by it today, wasn't it?

Well, I have no particular announcements, so take us away.

Q    Robert, the President said in his remarks that he had no intention or no desire to run these auto companies.  But the way this is moving along, hasn't the government and the administration effectively set itself up as a proto board of directors by all of the decisions it's going to make about how these companies do, in fact, proceed, or at least the veto power it has over these plans?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think what the determinations that the President's Auto Task Force and that the President have made denotes the seriousness by which companies are asking for extraordinary assistance.  And the President and the task force, understanding the request for that assistance, are going to take measures and steps to protect -- to protect the taxpayers, as well as seeking the best solution to put these companies back on firmer footing and on a path towards long-term viability.

I don't think in any way is the federal government running these companies or this industry.  I think that's not fair.  I think you've seen -- if you want to talk specifically about management changes, this is not the first entity receiving -- that's received extensive assistance that has seen a change in management or a composition structure of their board of directors.

Q    Talk about forced -- forced change.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, without getting real specific about what's happened in the past -- some of which we weren't here for -- I'm not entirely sure that some of the board and the CEOs of companies that we've talked about extensively in the past few weeks altogether might have gone willingly.

Q    Just to follow-up, could you clarify on the warranty issue?  Because the language is a little bit unclear in the document you put out.  Does it apply -- the government backing of these warranties apply only to automobiles and vehicles made by Chrysler and GM?  Or is there a buy-in of some sort -- other auto makers, including foreign makers with plants here?

MR. GIBBS:  Let me double-check.  Let me double-check the specifics of that.  I will -- we'll get that -- for everybody to ensure that there's no confusion there.

Yes, sir.

Q    Thanks.  A follow-up on cars, a couple questions on cars, because -- and related to management as well.  Does Wagoner's resignation -- is that a one-time thing or does that suggest a change in approach from the White House for companies that are getting bailout money?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I think if you go back and look at -- let me just say two things.  One, I think as we -- as we look at all these individual circumstances, I would look at them exactly that way -- as individual.  Secondly, as I said a moment ago, I think if you look back at -- and again, some of which this administration wasn't here for -- there have been management and board of directors changes in the past.

Q    But you're tying this to the plan.  You're tying this to aid.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, but, again, I think -- and this was I think pretty clear yesterday -- that this was -- as we've said, this was something that the task force asked for.  It's something that was agreed to.  So I think this notion somehow of -- been said is a quid pro quo is incorrect.

Q    A follow-up then specifically on GM.  Why Fritz Henderson, why did he end up being the new CEO, when he actually designed the plan that's been rejected by the task force?  Why --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, obviously I think there is -- and I don't want to presuppose anything going forward because, again, to build on the original question, we're asking for a plan over the course of the next 60 days that we think meets the test of viability.  We want to see -- the President strongly wants to see these companies do well, and the communities that these companies are rooted in recover and do well.  We've had generations of -- generations of people working in some of these plans.

So in the interim, as the President said in his remarks, that this was a good way to start anew in this 60-day period -- and again, without getting too far forward as to what might happen beyond 60 days.

Q    But I just don't understand how it's starting anew if you're choosing the CEO who submitted the plan that's being rejected.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I think you've got some management changes, you've got some board of director changes, and I think you have, we believe, at least the beginnings of a new beginning.

Q    With him.

MR. GIBBS:  Yes.

Jake.

Q    Can you explain to Americans who heard the President today why there seems to be this disconnect -- a lot of tough talk and tough demands from the administration when it comes to the auto industry, but that doesn't seem to be carried on when dealing with Wall Street or the banking industry.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think I -- initially I think the first thing I would say to anybody, including the American people, is, understand that we have taken and are prepared to take extraordinary steps to help the auto industry get back up on its feet, to put it on firmer ground, and to see it return to a stronger position; to support the companies, the workers and the communities they're in.

I think if you look at -- and I think this question was asked over the course of the last, sort of, 12 hours -- you know, the original agreements contemplated a March 31st deadline whereby you would either do -- you would either give additional assistance or call the loans.

So I think what the President and his task force are doing are taking a step forward to help these companies, at the same time expecting a term -- a plan for viability in the future.  I would also say that the decisions that are made on any entity receiving assistance is done in a way that we think will help stabilize the economy, create jobs; in some cases, it's to protect jobs and create -- and to have a manufacturing base, like with GM and Chrysler.  In others, it's to get lending moving again.

But I think that this administration is rightly matching and balancing the notion for responsibility; at the same time, understanding that we want to be a partner in ensuring a strong and viable auto industry as we move forward.

Q    Just a -- you know, a brief follow-up.  On Friday, you had a bunch of bank CEOs meeting with the President in the State Dining Room and then they came out and they talked and obviously it was a amicable but honest and frank meeting; at the same time Rick Wagoner was being told at the Treasury Department, you need to step down.  Even if you don't support the premise of my question, there at least is an appearance, optics, of the administration being nice to one industry and tough with another one.

MR. GIBBS:  Let me --

Q    That's what it looks like.  Whether or not you agree with it, that's what it looks like.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me -- I guess let me answer -- ask -- answer your question with a bit of a question.  Who represented at the meeting on Friday, Merrill Lynch and Wachovia?

Q    Because they weren't there, is that right?

MR. GIBBS:  Because those entities no longer exist.  I think we've taken some tough measures and this includes -- on different administrations; I'm not -- we think that the decision that the task force and the President made today present the very best opportunity to move these companies forward, to create and protect these jobs, to ensure that America has a strong and viable auto industry in the future.  And that's exactly what the President wants to see.

I think you heard him talk today about ensuring -- ensuring warranties, ensuring through additional staffing that people will be in auto communities and talking to workers about ensuring that they have the benefits that they need and that the communities that support these auto industries get what they need going forward.  We've talked about in the past week or so, help for auto supplies who have also been part of the downturn that has seen jobs go away.

So I think all of the steps that the administration has taken are to put us on a path back toward viability.

Yes, sir.

Q    Two quick questions.  One, what happens to GM if there is no deal reached by the 60-day window?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- without getting too far ahead, I think what we're -- I think over the course of the next 60 days, in conjunction with the task force, and GM is going to discuss with all of its entities how best to move forward and how best to reevaluate and revamp the restructuring plan.

So I think what the President has asked GM to do today is to sit down and go back to that table, re-plan and come back again, and we'll certainly make a determination.

But I would underscore this:  The President -- as I said a second ago, the President wants to see a viable, strong auto industry that supports the -- that's good for workers and is good for the communities that these workers live in.

Q    And secondly, the President talked a bit about sacrifice today.  He mentioned that 400,000 jobs have been cut from the industry in the past year.  Michigan has been -- had the highest unemployment rate in the nation for several years now.  How much sacrifice do you think that state needs to give in order to make these plans work?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- look, I spent some time last night on the phone with the Governor of Michigan.  I think anybody that travels in the Midwest, we've done -- we've visited plants that -- some of which are not operational anymore -- over the course of the campaign.  The President understands the tremendous pain that is going through these communities and that have seen the type of change that we've seen over the course of the last couple years in this industry as the recession has hit home.

The President today, though, set forward a plan that he believes will begin to turn this around, put these companies back on that firm path, and put us back in a position to be strong again.  And I think -- look, the President understands the sacrifice.  His charge to the task force and the decisions that he made were to ensure that the decision he made doesn't add to, but instead -- doesn't add to the pain, but instead puts us on a path towards a different place for the auto industry that has, in many ways, been an icon of our American economy.

Dan.

Q    Mr. Wagoner in his release said that he was asked to "step aside."  Does he have another role with the company, or is he leaving the company?

MR. GIBBS:  My understanding, he's leaving the company.  I think he's also on the board of directors.  But my understand that he's leaving the company.

Q    Okay.  Because I was wondering if the President had had -- you know, there was some consideration to his compensation package, so therefore keep him in some role and not have him leave the company.

MR. GIBBS:  I think the best, honestly, to do is to check with GM on that.

Q    Then on the issue of Fiat, what was it that the administration saw in this company -- that has not been able to do well here in the United States; has done well in turning around its company overseas but hasn't done anything here -- what was it that the administration saw that perhaps could give some indication that they could help Chrysler?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think you've touched on it, and that is, we've seen their ability to restructure overseas and we believe there are, as the President outlined, strong commitments to ensuring that technologies that they've worked on and developed will be brought -- will be brought here, and that some of that technology can be utilized in the development and manufacture of more efficient cars, and to meet a demand in this market.

Chip.

Q    Going back to the bank CEOs, does the decision on Mr. Wagoner put them on notice that they could be asked, any one of them could be asked to step aside if the White House is not happy with their performance?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I think it's imperative or important to ensure that we look at these things all individually.  Look, I think that it is safe for anyone to assume -- and I don't mean just for CEOs, but, I mean, obviously we've got, there are, you know, 300 million taxpayers who any of us owe it to, to be responsible with their money.  We're going to do what needs to be done to ensure and protect their money and to use whatever we use wisely to get our economy moving again -- whether it is assistance to a bank that we hope will turn around and lend that money to a family or small business, or whether that's in helping an icon like GM or Chrysler get back on its feet again and get back to the place that we all know it's capable of being.

Q    Could you walk us through the President's decision?  Did he simply accept in total all of the recommendations of the task force?  Did he accept some, not accept others?  And was this an agonizing decision in the end or was it an easy decision for him to make?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think -- in general I've heard the President say with some frequency over the past 68 or 69 or 70 days --

Q    Seventy.

MR. GIBBS:  Seventy days, thank you, Mark.  (Laughter.)  I knew I was grasping -- I was just waiting.  You were supposed to cue a little earlier.

You know, I've heard him say frequently over the past 70 days that the decisions that land in his lap or the decisions that are put on his desk to make are the hard ones.  Easy decisions never get to his desk or inside of his office.

I don't want to go through the whole tick-tock except, you know, the President has spent a lot of time in the last -- the last several days in extensive meetings here.  He's been -- we've had many meetings as part of his economic briefings each day on the status of this and where this is going, because for, you know, quite some time, we've known that the 31st of March was out there.

And again, I think what -- the decision the President has made and the task force has made, we believe provide the greatest opportunity for GM and Chrysler.  And that's -- that's the decision he made.

Chuck.

Q    I want to follow a little bit about what Jake asked about with the CEOs and the difference between the auto industry and the banking and the financial industry.  It's not just on the CEO front there's been -- there's time tables, lots more strings that are -- have been attached to everything that's happened to GM and Chrysler, including the March 31st deadline, the original deadline.

MR. GIBBS:  Right --

Q    The fact that they had a new viability plan -- AIG, did they have they had to submit a viability plan?

MR. GIBBS:  Well --

Q    Do they have strings -- do they have a timing of when they're supposed to return money?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, two things.  One, as you well know, the original loan agreements are a function of either late November or early December.

Q    But you never brought into -- I mean, they were working -- that was in the transition, it was clear that --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, we --

Q    -- you guys were working with the outgoing administration.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, please don't underestimate our ability to --

Q    But at the time --

MR. GIBBS:  -- change laws as the incoming White House staff --

Q    But they ran it by you.

MR. GIBBS:  -- so as not to get the -- draw the ire of, say, White House Counsel.

Q    Did they not run it by you?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, being apprised of something I think is far different than the full power of after one places their hand on a Bible at or around the 20th of January.

But again, I would also -- I don't want to be too foreshadowing or have my tone measured in any way, but I think the -- there are viability tests that are going on right now in the form of health assessments for banks that the Federal Reserve, in conjunction -- that the Federal Reserve is conducting to understand a worst-case economic scenario as it relates to financial institutions.

So, look, I think one of the things that has -- if there is one thing that has marked some change is that we are trying to get a full and complete assessment of what is out there.  Since the activities of, sort of, mid-September of last year and where we find ourselves in the past 10 weeks is the desire -- and I've spoken about it a lot -- of the desire to ensure that we have a real sense of -- for these financial institutions -- what we're dealing with.

Q    Why is it that there's the appearance that there's more strings for the auto industry than there has been for the financial industry --

MR. GIBBS:  Again, I think --

Q    -- because --

MR. GIBBS:  Well, let's -- I think for -- I don't know the exact accounting, but we're I think talking about more than $20 billion for these two companies.  That's no small amount of money.

Q    No, but Citi and Bank of America and AIG are all --

MR. GIBBS:  But again, Chuck, again as I said earlier, I would hesitate again to -- I hesitate to categorically look at these as a group rather than, in some ways, as individual cases. Let's take AIG, for instance.

The mechanism by which the Secretary -- the Secretary spoke about last week on Capitol Hill several times was the ability and the authority to render some conclusions for AIG to use some parts of it as good -- that are good and doing well, and some parts of it that aren't and breaking those up.  But understand, even what we're talking about under that authority with AIG, or the authority of putting some entity in bankruptcy for the purposes of, as the President discussed, breaking apart and liquidating, is far different than what the President spoke about and is contemplating as part of this.

So, again, the path forward for each of these two auto companies isn't, in quite -- in all honesty, comparable because you've got different circumstances involved there.  So I hesitate to draw these sort of easy and discernable --

Q    And on the bankruptcy, you said -- you just referred to what the President said.  It's fair to read this government warranty when the President stood up there, almost like an advertisement, and said, you know, we back all these cars; come on down to the garage and pay for this.  Is this a precursor to the bankruptcy?

MR. GIBBS:  No, no, no.  I think it is ensuring with our backing that no person that goes out today to buy a Jeep -- which I love to drive; I used to have a Jeep -- if somebody wants to go buy a Jeep, they should not hesitate to do so because that warranty will be ensured through that commitment.  If somebody wants to go buy, as the President said, the Motor Trend car of the year, they can go do that.

Q    And if Chrysler Financial files for bankruptcy tomorrow, or in 31 days, but then sells off all their cars, just sells them off, the government is backing up all these warranties?

MR. GIBBS:  The government is ensuring that -- ensuring those warranties and giving people the peace of mind and the confidence to continue purchasing great American automobiles.

Q    Under -- just who runs that?  What does that --

MR. GIBBS:  I believe out of Treasury and part of the task force.  But we'll get more details.

Yes, ma'am.

Q    Thank you.  I'd just like to follow up on some of the -- that has been out there here.  You've been asked a couple times whether the actions regarding these auto companies should be viewed as something that the banks should pay attention to because a similar approach may come their way.  And you said, no, we should look at these as individual cases.  So are you essentially --

MR. GIBBS:  I guess what I'm trying to do is, I'm just trying to -- again, the example I just used with Chuck, I mean, the pathway for two auto companies is, based on the President's decision today, different.  So I think to take any series of other entities and put them on that same scale, those paths may also be different.  That's all I'm --

Q    There's certain principles that underlie all of these decisions, though, obviously, and there is a certain willingness or unwillingness of the administration to dictate certain terms as a condition of receiving federal money.  And so are you saying, by saying these are individual cases, are you trying to communicate that these banks really -- don't worry about this, this isn't coming your way?

MR. GIBBS:  No, I --

Q    I think it's a fair question.

MR. GIBBS:  It is.  It's a little general -- general and somewhat nonspecific.  And again, what I'm -- I guess what I'm asking is, instead of looking at every entity as the same entity, I think that's -- I don't think that's hypothetically productive.

Q    Well, do you want me to ask the question that way by inserting all the names of all the banks that have received aid and ask if it would apply to that?  I mean, would that be more helpful?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, understanding that some of the circumstances are different.

Q    But why Rick Wagoner and not Ken Lewis?

MR. GIBBS:  Again, some of these things are -- I don't have anything specific on Bank of America.  But again, I just don't want to be generalistic across the board.

Q    So, in other words, you really don't want people reading anything more into this?

MR. GIBBS:  I hope people read into it exactly what I said rather than reading into it what they want to read into it.

Q    It's our job to help people -- to explain to people what it is that you're saying, and so I'm trying to make sure I understand it.

MR. GIBBS:  Okay.  (Laughter.)

Q    It sounds like what you're saying is, no, you don't want us to interpret this as a sign of things to come for others --

MR. GIBBS:  My hesitancy --

Q    -- and if that's the case, why don't you just say --

MR. GIBBS:  My hesitancy -- no, no, my hesitancy is just to look at every entity the same way, because, again, the circumstances by which any entity is at any certain point may well be different, even though it's the same type of entity, right?  Again, I want to go back to GM and Chrysler.  On the face, both are auto companies, right?  Both have found themselves at a point where they're seeking additional government assistance, adding in to the additional loans that they got to put them on a path toward viability.  But again, the examples by which we're using -- or that the President has made a determination about which direction they're going to go is different even though they're both auto industry.

Q    Of course, and I'm not suggesting the exact same remedy would apply to any one of these things, but, again, if you look at the general case, you have, say, generically, contracts that at AIG were unbreakable because they're legal contracts but for the UAW, those are contracts that you fully expect them to modify if they're going to get federal assistance.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think this -- I think many people have made -- I think many people have made sacrifices, but, again, without looking through the individual instances of other entities, it's hard to make that generalization.

Mark.

Q    Robert, did you say earlier that there was no quid pro quo on Rick Wagoner's departure?

MR. GIBBS:  Yes.

Q    Does that mean -- do you prefer the language, "he was asked to leave" or "he was told to leave"?

MR. GIBBS:  I would simply put out that -- exactly what we told many people yesterday, and that was, we asked and he agreed.

Yes, sir.

Q    Following up on that, when did the President decide that Wagoner had to go, and who specifically asked him to go?

MR. GIBBS:  I'm not going to get into a tick-tock.

Q    Why not?

MR. GIBBS:  Because I'm not.

Q    All right.  Why did the President think Wagoner should go?

MR. GIBBS:  I think the President addressed this in his remarks today, and that is that, though he thanked him for his many years of service to GM, that now was a time for a new beginning.

Yes.

Q    In distinguishing between these -- Chrysler and GM, which you've asked us to do, could you distinguish them between why Mr. Wagoner had to go and Mr. Nardelli did not have to go?  They both filed unviable business plans.

MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, I think you've got different entities moving in different directions.  Obviously there's some degree of -- as the President talked about, Chrysler needing -- needing partners going forward in order to I think both meet the standard of viability as well as some additional assistance beyond what the President denoted is working capital in that 30-day period of time.  Again, obviously they are also two very different companies.

Q    Robert, can I follow-up on that?

MR. GIBBS:  Hold on one second.  I can get back to you.  Yes, sir.

Q    The President talked about how bankruptcy, this pre-approved bankruptcy might be the best way to get these companies a fresh start.  Was there some thought given to doing that now, or what's going to be different in 60 days or --

MR. GIBBS:  I think in the 60-day time period you've got the ability for GM to work with -- work again with all of the stakeholders that are involved.  The President and the team certainly have not ruled out the notion that if -- in order to ensure that viability moving forward, they wouldn't preclude the idea of, as they said, a quick, largely preplanned bankruptcy to make some of those changes.

Yes, sir.

Q    Robert, the senior officials who spoke last night, they said that as part of the process for these two companies going forward, either we were looking at a bankruptcy or some other process where the bondholders would have to take a substantial reduction in the amount of money they expected to get back.  One of the very big debt holders to these two companies right now is the United States government and the United States taxpayer.  Is part of why it looks like the White House is being tougher on these companies the fact that that taxpayer money isn't going to come back, because once you go into bankruptcy or writing down debt, the taxpayer money is also in jeopardy -- unlike the banks, which claim they're going to pay it back eventually?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, no, I mean, again, I think part of this is what's going to happen in this 60-day period.  There may be -- and, look, this has been covered I think fairly extensively in the past few weeks -- there have been stakeholders that have not been as willing to come forward and come to the table and understand that greater sacrifice, along with others that are making sacrifices, is needed.

Q    And are the taxpayers one of those stakeholders at this point that's going to have to make an additional sacrifice?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- the President believes that the decision will put these companies on the best path forward and ultimately putting them on that stable and strong path to where they're regaining market share and they're selling automobiles is the best way for the taxpayer to recoup the money that has been loaned to Chrysler and GM.

Yes, sir.

Q    For the taxpayer that you're trying to protect, what can you tell that person will be different under the new management of GM that was not true yesterday?

MR. GIBBS:  Well --

Q    What will Rick Wagoner's departure mean in the next 60 days that was not achievable with him at the top of the company?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think what we are -- what the President has asked General Motors to do is to reevaluate the plan that was presented to the task force and ultimately to the President, and to come up with a more workable, long-term and viable solution, whereby the President believes that these companies can be strong again.  And the President and the task force determined that this was an opportunity for a new beginning at General Motors.  And obviously we believe that the company will come up with a strong restructuring plan that gets this company to viability.  We believe they can be strong -- a strong, viable, vibrant auto industry.

Q    And the task force and the President's conclusion, that was not possible with Mr. Wagoner at the helm?

MR. GIBBS:  I think they believed that this was a period of time that represented that new beginning.

Q    Now, for the warranties, where will that money come from?  Will that money come from TARP, or will that require a --

MR. GIBBS:  I get additional information --

Q    And can you tell the cost of those -- the estimated cost of that will be?

MR. GIBBS:  I'll try to get you as much information as we can.

Margaret.

Q    Thank you.  Two questions.  There are reports that Chrysler and Fiat have reached a partnership.  Is that a report that the President was aware of when he spoke this morning?  Or is that something that evolved -- do you have any details and --

MR. GIBBS:  I have not seen -- I mean, I think that -- I want to double-check, but Chrysler and Fiat have been working on some partnership for quite some time.  Obviously the President discussed in the remarks today hurdles in the present -- hurdles in the -- I don't want to use "present," because then you're just introducing into the present -- entered into the idea that they've had for a couple of months, that still needs to be worked out in order, in our view, for the deal to work.

So --

Q    It's not resolved.

MR. GIBBS:  I don't think there's a resolution.  I will get better guidance when I get off here as to what might have happened as I was coming.

Q    A quick follow-up, second question.  The President spoke about incentives, spoke about guarantees where people could feel confident buying American cars.  But there's one thing he didn't do directly, which was ask the American people to buy American cars.  And I'm wondering, is it a philosophical issue that he doesn't feel -- protectionism?  I mean, what's the issue?

MR. GIBBS:  No, no, no.  Look, I don't think -- I don't think the President would have extended assurances that he did today if he didn't want to encourage people to do that.  Again, as we discussed last week, he's the owner of an American car; I'm the owner of an American car -

Q    Is he asking people, for your next car, please consider buying an American car?

MR. GIBBS:  Absolutely.  And I think he pointed out today that of the companies that we're talking about, like I said, he said in his remarks, he mentioned -- I don't want to turn this into an advertisement -- (laughter) -- you know, Chevy Malibu was the 2008 Motor Trend Car of the Year, or North American Car of the Year.

Q    -- Buick again -- (laughter.)

MR. GIBBS:  But I think it bears mentioning that in the recent dependability study that was put out, you know, Buick was tied for first.  I think it's important -- I think that's important to understand because that is precisely the reason by which the President came to this decision and determination, because we have seen -- and we shouldn't minimize this -- these companies have taken big steps towards restructuring; they've taken big steps in investing in the cars of the future, in showcasing what is possible from an auto industry -- whether it relates to electric cars or something like that.

And we should not in any way minimize that, or take that away, that that certainty and pride from the leadership and the workers in these plants and in these communities that have made that sacrifice and have worked hard every day, it shouldn't be minimized.

What the President has determined is we can make -- we need some more changes in order to assure that viability long term.  The President is invested in looking for that and he's very invested in that strong, long-term auto industry right here in America.

Yes, sir.

Q    Can I ask about -- it's moving onto the bill signing this afternoon.  Can we move on to another topic or are you --

MR. GIBBS:  I'm game.  (Laughter.)

Q    The President this afternoon is going to sign the land -- omnibus land bill.  It was posted on the White House web site about noon on Friday and you guys announced it in the weekend guidance on -- about 6:00 p.m., he was going to sign it.  That's only six hours for comment before he apparently made the decision to sign the bill.  What's the purpose of having the five-day public comment period if you're -- you can make these decisions with so short comment allowed?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think that the President is committed to and has brought greater transparency to this White House.  There are obviously situations that come up -- especially if the President is going to go overseas for a certain period of time while a bill is there.  We have worked through and are working through differences in -- when bills are done in the House and the Senate, when conference reports that we know are going to be -- legislation ultimately ends up on the President's desk, putting that on a web site.

Although not perfect, I think the President has made a greater step forward in transparency and feels like we're making progress on ensuring the that American people can see and read what their President is going to sign into law.

Q    Do you expect that those comments will at some point affect whether he does or doesn't sign a bill?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, that's certainly -- the intention is to let the American people make comments as to what the President is going to sign and to take any of that into effect as we move forward.

Yes, sir.

Q    -- on the left, and the Heritage foundation on the right have both questioned the legality of using TARP funds for the auto bailout.  Just wanted to ask you, since President Obama had said that he would consider bankruptcy as an option, why do you even use more TARP funds considering that it's legally questionable?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I'm not a -- I said earlier I'm not a contracts lawyer, I happen to also not be a constitutional lawyer -- mostly because I'm not a lawyer at all.  (Laughter.)  Though sometimes I'm sure you think I sound like it.

I think the determination has been made both in the previous and in the current administration that this is assistance that is legal.  Our goal is to ensure that taxpayers in any instance where this money is used feel confident that it's being done in a transparent and accountable way, and one that protects their interest.

Yes, sir.

Q    The President said if Chrysler does not complete this deal with Fiat in 30 days there will be no more taxpayer money.  So if for any reason if Fiat walks away from the table, does that mean that the government is willing to let Chrysler, essentially, liquidate?  And is the government making any preparations for what the economic dislocation impact would be of a Chrysler essentially ceasing to exist?

MR. GIBBS:  Well, I mean, obviously I think the 30-day period -- without getting into the hypothetical if a Fiat didn't work -- obviously there could well be somebody else that steps forward.  I think it's important to let the 30 day process play out.

In terms of the second question, I think it's important to understand the role that the President enunciated today for Ed Montgomery.  We are not waiting for either some 30- or 60-day window to elapse before somebody serving on the task force and working closely with the team and the President gets into the communities and talks directly to workers that would be impacted by any event, either going forward or that has already resulted in cutbacks or unemployment.

Obviously there has been changes in -- through the Recovery and Reinvestment Plan that ensure benefits and health care, that we want to make sure everyone knows about.  And I think the President spoke in his remarks about the idea of evaluating proposals that we've seen introduced in Congress and that we've heard from leaders -- like Governor Granholm -- whether it's increased economic development assistance or programs to spur the purchase of automobiles -- that we look into that immediately, and not again wait for any 30- or 60-day period.

Q    And will the government propose or approve any of the new GM board members that are going to be named in the next few months?

MR. GIBBS:  I truthfully don't know the answer to that, but I can certainly find it.

Yes, ma'am.

Q    Thank you.  There was -- a lot of minorities and women (inaudible) of the stimulus package.  They're saying, if you're going to give the jobs to the unions, the unionized workers, then you're going to be leaving out a lot of the Latinos and a lot of the women -- they don't belong to the unions.  What's going to be done for them?

MR. GIBBS:  Relating to -- is this related to the auto industry or in general?

Q    In general, with all the stimulus package, because that's given mostly to the union people.

MR. GIBBS:  The stimulus?  I'm confused.

Q    Well, the way it is written and the way the President was talking before, a lot of the jobs is going to be going to the people in charge of the union workers, and a lot of the --

MR. GIBBS:  No, let me -- I think I get where we're going.

I think the President wants to create good, high-wage, stable jobs in this economy, whether it is construction jobs, whether it is saving jobs for men and women in classrooms, whether it's creating clean-energy jobs, working on solar panels and windmills.  The President is focused on making sure that we are creating -- saving and creating those jobs, that we're doing it in communities that need it.  There are no requirements on that.  We're looking only to ensure that the economy grows steadily and that we put ourselves on a strong foundation for that long term.

Thank you, all.

Q    Thank you.  Happy Birthday.

MR. GIBBS:  Thank you.

END
1:40 P.M. EDT
