Good afternoon, everybody.  Thanks for coming. Last night, the President was honored to announce Judge Neil Gorsuch as his nominee to serve as the next justice to the Supreme Court.  It was an unbelievably phenomenal evening. Immediately after being announced, Judge Gorsuch was honored to meet with Maureen and Father Scalia.  As some of you have reported, his first call after coming back behind the podium was to Merrick Garland, who I would also note has already come out to say that Judge Gorsuch deserves a fair hearing.
In less than 24 hours, Judge Gorsuch has already received widespread praise from across the political spectrum as an inspired choice, with sterling academic credentials, a brilliant legal mind, and a steadfast commitment to constitutional principles. During his long career in public service, Judge Gorsuch has enjoyed bipartisan approval, having previously been confirmed by a voice vote to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit. In fact, 12 current Democratic senators -- including Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Senator Leahy -- were all in office when he was first confirmed without opposition in 2006. With as many as eight Democrats, like Senators Blumenthal, Durbin, McCaskill, already supporting a full hearing and vote for Judge Gorsuch, there is no question that he is a widely respected jurist who deserves to have his nomination fairly decided upon by the United States Senate.Now that Judge Gorsuch has been officially named, I hope you all allow me to talk for a moment about how exceptionally qualified he is to succeed the late, great Antonin Scalia. Judge Gorsuch’s academic record is impeccable, and as he said last night, the President holds education in the highest regard. Judge Gorsuch graduated Phi Kappa Beta [sic] from Columbia, graduated cum laude from Harvard Law School, and attended Oxford as a recipient of the prestigious Marshall Scholarship.
Like Justice Scalia, the cornerstone of Judge Gorsuch’s judicial philosophy is fidelity to the text.  He believes that judges should base their decisions solely on the law and the -- he believes -- sorry, I almost screwed that one up -- (laughter) -- he believes his decision should be based solely on the law and the Constitution, not on their own policy preferences or personal feelings.  He will be a reliable and principled voice on the bench, preserving equal justice under the law, regardless of background. And I would note, I think -- and I always want to caveat this -- but to my understanding, I think he would be the first justice that will serve with the -- as someone he clerked for on the bench.  So it will be a sort of first when he is confirmed by the Senate. Now, on to the issues of the day.  Today is February 1st, which means we are kicking off Black History Month.  The President has events planned throughout the month, starting today with a listening session that occurred earlier this morning with African American leaders in the Roosevelt Room.  The meeting also included some of the administration’s African American appointees. Later today, the President will issue a proclamation.  The U.S. Postal Service kicked off the month by issuing the Dorothy Height Forever stamp, the 40th stamp in their Black Heritage series.  Dr. Height led the National Council of Negro Women for four decades and was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Bill Clinton in 1994 and the Congressional Medal of Freedom by President George W. Bush in 2004 -- excuse me, 1994 and 2004.  President Obama delivered her eulogy in 2010, and President Trump is now proud that the Post Office is honoring her incredible legacy as a civil rights icon. At events throughout this entire month, we'll celebrate the contributions of courageous African American leaders -- from Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass to Martin Luther King, Jr., and Clarence Thomas.  African American history is American history, and this month is a great reminder of that. Continuing with today’s schedule, the Vice President went to the Hill with Judge Gorsuch to meet with lawmakers for the first time since being named last night.  On the Hill, the Vice President met with Majority Leader McConnell.  And the staff spearheading Judge Gorsuch’s nomination will also meet with Senators Cornyn, Grassley, Hatch, and Gardner. With Judge Gorsuch on Capitol Hill, I think it's a good time to talk about the confirmation process.  Neither of the two Supreme Court justices that President Obama nominated were subject to the 60-vote threshold of a Senate filibuster.  They received bipartisan support because Republicans, despite some political and philosophical differences, viewed them as mainstream and qualified.  And Judge Gorsuch should receive the same fair treatment. Also this morning, the President met in the Roosevelt Room with representatives of outside groups to discuss Judge Gorsuch’s nomination, including David O'Steen of the National Right to Life; Paula White of the New Destiny Christian Center; Wayne LaPierre of the National Rifle Association; Penny Nance of Concerned Women of America; Charmaine Yoest of American Values; Juanita Duggan of the National Federation of Independent Businesses; Tom Collamore of the United States Chamber of Commerce; Grover Norquist of Americans for Tax Reform; Leonard Leo of the Federalist Society; Marjorie Dannenfelser of the Susan B. Anthony List; and Morton Blackwell of the Leadership Institute. President Trump told the group that his decision on the Supreme Court is among the most important decisions he will ever make as President.  He praised Judge Gorsuch for his academic and professional achievements and his lifelong devotion to the law. The attendees thanked the President for making such an inspired choice and for delivering on what was, for many of them, their number one issue in the campaign.  They committed vocally to supporting Judge Gorsuch throughout the confirmation process and expressed their desire for the Senate to move swiftly to give him a fair hearing and vote.  The meeting closed with the President inviting the group in the Oval Office, which several attendees really enjoyed that honor.  The President then had lunch with Secretary of State designee Tillerson.  Mr. Tillerson’s tenacity, broad experience, and deep understanding of the geopolitics are going to make him an outstanding chief diplomat for the United States, and the President is looking forward to the full vote of the Senate on his nomination.  Later this evening, the President will participate in a standing legislative affairs strategy meeting with his team, who have been working closely with Congress to enact the President’s agenda.  So far, between the Vice President and staff, we've had many productive conversations with members of both parties, in both chambers, on a variety of issues, from trade to the President’s nomination for the Cabinet and now the Supreme Court. 
Now, starting this week, our Legislative Affairs team will also conduct extensive outreach on behalf of Judge Gorsuch’s nomination process.  Clearly, this administration has made reaching out to Congress a top priority, but you know where I’m going with that:  Democrats in the Senate continue to use every tool at their disposal to try and get in the way of the President’s attempts to make America great again. Just today, Senate Democrats again refused to even participate in committee votes for Senate [sic]-designees Price and Mnuchin who were moved out of the Finance Committee with zero Democrats present.  Democrats also boycotted EPA Administrator-designee Pruitt’s hearing.  They're doing their constituents and our country a disservice by resorting to these childish tactics.  The President’s Cabinet nominees will be confirmed on the floor of the Senate, once Democrats actually allow them to get a fair vote.
In other Cabinet news, Attorney General-designee Senator Jeff Sessions was voted out of committee today.  We look forward to his full vote as the next Attorney General. Additionally, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson -- designee -- is expected to receive a vote by the full Senate this afternoon.  And finally, Veterans Administration Secretary-designee Dr. David Shulkin will go before the Senate Committee on Veterans Affairs at 2:30 this afternoon. A few more things before I open it up for questions.  In terms of the schedule tomorrow, the President will attend the National Prayer Breakfast and have lunch with Harley Davidson executives here at the White House.  The President will also meet with Senator Hatch, Senator Wyden, Congressman Neal and Congressman Brady.  Further guidance on all of those meetings will be coming soon. A few personnel announcements.  Today, the President sent the following nominations to the Senate:  Rachel L. Brand, of Iowa, to be Associate Attorney General; Steven Andrew Engel, of D.C., to be Assistant Attorney General; and Rod J. Rosenstein, of Maryland, to be a Deputy Attorney General. On another note, yesterday we talked about recent reporting concerning the President’s executive order protecting the nation from foreign terrorist entry.  I wanted to draw your attention to some polls that have come out on that subject.  For all the hysteria around the implementation of this order, the American people as a whole are very supportive of the action that the President is taking.  A new Rasmussen Report polls finds that 57 percent -- which is a clear majority -- of likely U.S. voters favor a temporary ban on refugees from Syria, Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Yemen until the government can do a better job of keeping these individuals out who pose a threat. A Reuters poll found that 66 percent of Americans believe that the United States should limit the number of refugees into the country.  And the safety of the American people and the security of the American homeland are the President’s top priorities, and most Americans agree with the steps that he's taking to keep our country safe. Further, today the United Arab Emirates foreign minister voiced his support for the President’s decision to take our national security so seriously.  The foreign minister also added that he believes the restrictions are not based on religion, but on the “structural problems” faced by these nations.   I know that there was a question on Monday regarding Iran’s firing of a missile and attack on a navy vessel.  I’d like to introduce National Security Advisor General Michael Flynn to provide a quick update. Thanks, General.  We are going to have a background briefing with NSA staff -- NSC staff, rather, today at 4:00 p.m. here in the briefing room.  Further details will be provided on that subject.  So thank you, General, with that. As we start off, I mentioned yesterday I'm pleased that we've expanded the briefing room -- at least virtually.  And so with that, as I begin to take your question, I'm pleased to offer the first-ever Skype seat question in the White House briefing room to Kim Kalunian from WPRI in Rhode Island. Kim. We can. Thanks, Kim.  I think the President's goal in ending sanctuary cities is pretty clear.  We want to, as we mentioned with these other actions, keep America safe.  The goal is to make sure on two fronts.  One, we are doing everything we can to protect American citizens, institutions, and ending sanctuary cities is one of the ways in which we can continue to do that.  Furthermore, the President has been very clear through his executive order that federal funds, paid for by hardworking taxpayers, should not be used to help fund sanctuary cities.  As we continue to implement this executive order and fulfill the pledge that he made, we'll have further updates on how we tend to -- on how that list will come out and when it will come out.  So I look forward to following up on that as well. With that, David Jackson. Go for it.  (Laughter.)  He did receive an intelligence briefing today.  Congressman -- or Director Pompeo was here.  General Flynn, his national security advisor, his briefer.  So he receives an intelligence briefing and the PBD every day. I think it is a more comprehensive -- again, I think -- we went through this during the transition period, right?  There is a difference between the raw intelligence and the analysis, and I think he is constantly updated by his national security team and other intelligence officials.  But every single day, he does receive the PBD.  And then I think, on top of that, he is receiving intelligence briefings from his team.  Well, I can get back to you on that.  He does get the PBD every day and on a daily basis meets with his intelligence team, yes. We're not going to do this again. Yeah. Not that I'm aware of.  It's day one.  We just started it off.  We'll have to get back to you on further details.  I think --  We have a lot -- there's a lot of activities, as I mentioned, that the President is going to do to celebrate and honor this month.  And this was just the first day of the month of February. Well, I think there's contribution -- I think he wants to highlight the contributions that he has made.  And I think through a lot of the actions and statements that he's going to make, I think the contributions of Frederick Douglass will become more and more.
Kristen. Well, as I mentioned, I think General Flynn and the NSC staff will have a briefing at 4:00 p.m.  They can go forward.  I'm not going to -- I think we wanted to make very clear that we felt as though that -- their actions were both provocative and a violation, and making sure that they understood that we weren't going to sit by and not act on those actions. I'm just -- I'm not going to go any further than that, Kristen. Well, I think those are two things.  I think we're going to -- you look at the support that's already come out.  I think there's eight senators already that have talked about the need to have a vote and his qualifications.  And not just the Senate but I mean you look at the widespread support that came out for Judge Gorsuch last night across the spectrum.  No matter your philosophical view of the Court, I think his qualifications for the Court, his academic background make him an unbelievably highly qualified person.
And so it's not just Chuck Schumer; I think the rest of the Senate as he goes up there -- but I think the interesting thing --  Hold on, hold on.  I understand that.  And I think Chuck Schumer has shown time and time again through this confirmation process with the Cabinet that he's more interested in politics than actually moving the government along.  And I think that is troubling.
I would ask you that -- I think that the question needs to be asked to Chuck Schumer:  Why are you stalling all of these nominees?  Why are you insisting on new requirements that you didn't assume for Sotomayor or Kagan?  I mean, there's a point at which they need to get asked, why are they obstructing government at every step of the way?  There's an element to which they need to be held accountable as well.  They held certain standards in place for their nominees, both for the bench and for the Cabinet.  And the question is, are they going to live up to the same standards that they imposed on Republicans when they had nominees in a Democratic White House. But again, Kristen, I think the goal is to get -- when -- but again, I would go back.  Chuck Schumer is not innocent in this.  There's a lot of comments that he's made and a lot of accusations that he's thrown out there and a lot of politics that he's played.  At some point, Chuck Schumer needs to be held accountable for his actions and his words. Blake. Well, I think the President made clear his goal today, which is, number one, he believes that Judge Gorsuch is unbelievably qualified and that he will get nominated -- not only confirmed, but done so with a large bipartisan vote.  As I said at the outset, Republicans looked at the qualifications of the two justices that got through in the Obama administration, and while they may not have agreed with their judicial philosophy, definitely agreed that they were qualified on the merits to be confirmed and they did so. I think that we would ask that we be held to the same standard that the Democrats used when they had nominees up.  But I think the President made very clear that the decision is something that we would rather not have to go down, but also that it is ultimately up to Senator McConnell and how he wants to operate this. John Gizzi. No, actually, John, he didn't.  That was media -- that was misreporting.  My understanding is that Judge Hardiman never left the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  So with all due respect, I can't be held accountable for reports that falsely stated that he was here.  He never was at the White House.  My understanding is he had a meeting in eastern Pennsylvania with another judge.  But it was -- and, again, I'm not -- I don't track his whereabouts, but my understanding is he never left the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania yesterday.  So it was -- we announced when we were going to make this announcement.  I think it was a phenomenal way to introduce Judge Gorsuch to the American people and the United States Senate.  We invited Democratic leaders, Democratic members of the Senate Judiciary Committee.  Unfortunately, none of them showed up.  But it was an opportunity for them and the American people to see an amazing choice that the President made for the bench.
Anita. You said one, John. Well, I think there's a lot of vacancies that we see at the appellate level and throughout the government.  He's an impressive, impressive jurist.  Obviously the four that really made that final list for the President were unbelievably impressive.  So I don't want to get in front of the President. Hopefully he continues to have the President's support and is someone that the President was unbelievably impressed with.  So we'll have to see what vacancies come down the pipe.
Anita. It's the normal process of getting those -- I've mentioned at a few briefings -- the deputies, the unders, and the actings are in the pipeline.  We announced one the other day for Homeland.  We've got Commerce was previously announced.  And so this is just a continuation of the process to fill --  Of course.  These are people that he is clearly aware of and supportive of, 100 percent. I just think -- look, it was easier for the executives to come here, considering the week and all of the activity that's been going on.  And we figured the easiest thing to do was -- again, no decision had been made about or announced as to what we were doing.  We looked at different options and, ultimately, the easiest thing to do in accordance with the President's schedule was to invite them here to Washington to talk about some of the stuff that we've been doing. We're not concerned.  I think we're not concerned about that.  We're concerned about American jobs, moving this economy forward, and we're excited to welcome them here to Washington to talk about the great work that they do and the many thousands of people that they employ.
With that, let me go to the -- we're going to be here a while, guys.  We'll go to the second Skype seat.  Natalie Herbick from Fox 8 in Cleveland, Ohio. Natalie. Natalie, you're coming back.  (Laughter.) That's a great question, Natalie.  I think it's not just Cleveland but it's Detroit and so many of the other cities around the country.  You've heard the President talk about the need to rebuild our inner cities.  We were really impressed with Cleveland this past July -- we went there for the national convention -- the people of Cleveland, their desire and the rebound that the city has taken.  And I think that when you go to -- whether it's a city like Cleveland or Detroit through different tax and regulatory measures, there's a way that we can continue to bring manufacturing back, we can continue to bring jobs back.  And whether it's Harley Davidson or Carrier or Lockheed or Boeing or the GM, Fiat, Ford, these companies, he continues to talk with about how they can bring jobs back, relocate.  I think that was, again, another one of the conversations that he had with the pharmaceutical companies yesterday.  How can they bring jobs back?  How can we ease regulations to do that? So it's about making sure that we have an environment, Natalie, that allows more cities to compete, to grow the manufacturing base, and to recognize the things that we can do, tax-wise and regulatory-wise, to allow that to flourish.
Cecilia. No, I think the President has been very clear that his number one goal is not to target any one religion but places and areas where we believe that there is an issue.  That's what the executive order was all about the other day -- making sure that areas that we don't feel have the proper mechanisms in place to assure the security -- that when they travel to the United States, that we know that they're coming here for peaceful purposes. The President's number-one goal has always been to focus on the safety of America, not the religion.  He understands that it's not a religious problem, it's a radicalization problem.  There's a big difference between Islam, the religion, and radical Islamic terrorists that come here to seek to do us harm. I just think I made it clear that there's a difference between the President's view. Yeah. Well, I think that we just -- we issued earlier today some clarification -- an update from the Counsel's Office that clarifies section 3C and 3E that legal permanent residents, LPRs, do not -- that the waiver -- you no longer need a waiver.  Initially, as the program was lifting off, the idea was that they would go through, be granted a waiver of which everyone was issued a waiver coming in. In the sake of efficiency, we have interpreted the guidance to all of these agencies to both the Acting Secretary of State, the Acting Attorney General and the Secretary of Homeland Security that the guidance is -- that all individuals are responsible for the administration implementation of this order -- that that does not apply.  They no longer need a waiver, because if they are a legal permanent resident, they won't need it anymore. Yeah.
Q    On Glass-Steagall, the President during his campaign said that he supported a reestablishing of Glass-Steagall legislation, which would separate the investment banks from the commercial banks.  There's legislation on both the House and the Senate side.  It's in the Republican program.  Mr. Mnuchin when he was queried on the Hill by Senator Cantwell, who is the author of one of the bills, was a little bit more ambiguous on this issue.  And I wish you could say something on where this President stands on this.
MR. SPICER:  I think part of the reason that it's -- we've got to get a Treasury Secretary confirmed.  And I think that when we sit here and get asked questions about policy and you go department after department, -- whether it's Treasury, Energy, EPA, HHS, HUD, Education -- the list goes on and on.  And so you ask about issues and where the President's agenda is.  Well, the reason that the President nominated these highly qualified people was to implement his agenda.  And Senate Democrats continue to hold that up.  And I think when you -- you can't -- you're asking us about how we're going to move forward on an agenda, whether it's Glass-Steagall or so many other issues.  And at the same time, the Democrats are holding up the confirmation of these highly qualified people.  Until that occurs, it makes it a heck of a lot harder.
Q    But the President --
MR. SPICER:  Major Garrett.
Q    -- still supports Glass-Steagall.
MR. SPICER:  The President's position is consistent, yes.
Q    Sean, a broad topic I'd like you to take on, which is dissent within the administration, and specifically related to the President's lunch with Rex Tillerson today.  More than 1,000 employees at the State Department, Foreign Service officers and others, have signed this dissent-gape.  Is it the President's position that Rex Tillerson, when he's confirmed, should go through the formal process, meet with those people, and have a dialogue as previous Secretaries of State have?  
And is it the President's point of view that when there is dissent, it can be rooted in a philosophical disagreement that's not necessarily in defiance of his orders and that there can be a dialogue, and that it can maybe inform him differently about policy?
MR. SPICER:  Sure.  I think the President has always --
Q    Because you said a couple days ago they should get out if they --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, I think there's a difference.  Just to be clear on this -- every American has a right to speak their mind.  That's one of the amazing beauties of this country.  You have the ability to write what you want through our First Amendment, and people have a right to speak out, and that's not hampered.  The point that I was making then is that if you believe so deeply that the policy is offensive to you, then you have to understand that the job, the way our government works is we elect a President, and that President gets to carry through their agenda that they set out with the American people during the campaign.    
And so they have a right to express it.  And I think Secretary Tillerson, for those who have gotten to meet him, has a very open mind and a desire to meet with people and hear ideas, as does the President, as evidenced through what did through the transition, and what he's done since he's become President.  He has met with groups, businesses, associations, Republicans, Democrats, independents, that have been supportive of him, that have not been supportive of him.  And I think that he's going to continue to do that. 
So people have a right to speak their mind, but I think there's a difference between expressing dissent and concern, and not implementing a lawful order, as the acting Attorney General did the other night.  
But again, I don’t mean to keep coming back to this, but you're asking what we'll do when Rex Tillerson becomes.  And part of the problem right now is I can't fully answer your question because Democrats are holding up and slow-walking this nomination.  So to presuppose what Rex Tillerson is going to do -- you know, again, I just -- it's ironic that we're being asked what these secretaries will do when they get into office, and the Democrats won't let them assume this, when we all know that the votes are there for them.
Q    But I'm just talking about a particular process that has historically been (inaudible) in the State Department.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And I think -- but again, I think for me to presuppose what Secretary-designee Tillerson is going to do prior to him actually getting sworn in, I don’t -- he probably will, I don’t know.  But it would be irresponsible of me to answer a question about what he's going to do before he actually gets sworn in.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Senate Democrats have been described as "bitter" over the manner in which Judge Merrick Garland was treated when he was nominated for the Supreme Court.  Do you feel, does the President feel that that bitterness is well-founded?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know, I'm not a Senate Democrat.  I think they have a right to feel the way they do.  I think we've explained our position, both during last year when this was going on, that we felt as though this was up to the voters to make a decision on.  And as I pointed out yesterday, so many voters made up their mind based on who they believe the candidates would appoint.  Mr. Trump -- then Mr. Trump -- then-candidate Trump, now President Trump was very clear about the type of people that he was going to put forth first in a list of 10 and then in a list of 11 additional ones.  So I think the American people knew clearly where he was going to go.  He followed through on that campaign promise.  
And I think that when you look at the number of people who solely based their vote on that, never mind it was -- and then you expand that, it was pretty clear that that was an important factor in the election. 
So I understand it, but I also think that's -- we had an election, it was a major issue in that election, and I think that even when you look across the spectrum -- Republican, Democrat, liberal, conservative -- Judge Gorsuch has an unbelievable record and is being praised for that record because of that.
Q    I want to ask about Friday, and there's been some reporting that there will be a meeting with President Trump and JP Morgan CEO and others.  Can you tell us a little bit more about who else will be there and where things are at on financial reform?  What message does the President have for bankers, specifically, on financial reform?  We've heard so much about Obamacare and tax reform, but it seems like financial reform has sort of fallen by the wayside.
MR. SPICER:  Well, I wouldn’t agree with that.  I think that when you look at regulatory reform and tax reform, and all of the steps that he's been taking to help the economy grow and to create jobs, that's right in that wheelhouse.  I hope to have further updates on the schedule for you tomorrow, but I don’t now.  
Mara.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  I have question about foreign policy, but I wanted to follow up.  You said that LPRs no longer need a waiver, but you didn’t answer the question about what about the people who were put on planes, people who were LPRs but would put on planes back to where they came from.  What happens to them?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, I think then they go through the process.  It depends if they're an LPR; if not, then they go through the application process.  So if they are an LPR, a legal permanent resident, then they are waived, they can come right through.
Q    So they can come back again?
MR. SPICER:  That's right.  But I don’t know how many cases that applies to.  I know that if they're not a legal permanent resident, then they have to go back.  And that's part of this vetting process.
Q    Sean --
Q    Wait, my question is about the fighting in Ukraine and Russia-backed rebels are moving the lines forward.  And I'm wondering if the President feels that Russia is testing him because this is coming so early in his administration before he's had a chance to fully assemble his team, and what he plans to do about it.
MR. SPICER:  The President has been kept aware of, through his National Security Council and his national security team as a whole, what's been going on in the Ukraine, and we'll have further updates as we go on.
Q    During the campaign last January, Donald Trump promised that on his first day in office he would get rid of gun-free zones in schools and on military bases.  When can we expect action on that?  And if so, can you share details of what we should expect?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think you've seen that the President has been very active in terms of getting executive orders out and following up on the campaign pledges that he made to the American people last night, being another example of that.  We're going to continue to move through this process, and I think we'll have further updates on where we are with respect to the rest of the EO process. 
With that, I want to go to my third Skype seat, Lars Larson of the Lars Larson Show.  
Q    Commander Spicer, it's a pleasure.  Thanks for your service to America, and thanks for the opportunity.  I've got a broad question.  The federal government is the biggest landlord in America.  It owns two-thirds of a billion acres of America.  I don’t think the Founders ever envisioned it that way.  Does President Trump want to start returning the people's land to the people?  And in the meantime, for a second question -- since that's in fashion these days -- can he tell the Forest Service to start logging our forests aggressively again to provide jobs for Americans, wealth for the Treasury, and not spend $3.5 billion a year fighting forest fires?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Lars.  I think the President has been very clear that as part of an overall comprehensive energy solution, that we've got to utilize the resources that we have, that the federal government owns, whether that's the forests or natural resources or minerals that exist above and below the ground, that we have too infrequently looked at our own resources and counted too much on foreign sources of energy.
So we're going to continue, as Congressman Zinke goes through the process to head up the Interior Department, and Governor Perry goes through his appointment -- his confirmation process, to get those individuals through, but then working together in areas where they have overlap and also on areas where they will act individually to realize, to look at those natural resources that we have and figure out how to best utilize them to benefit not just our energy, but also economic growth opportunities with that.
Daniel Happer (ph)
Q    I was wondering about executive orders.  You haven’t really explained why the President is using the executive orders in the manner that he's doing so.  Why not take this extreme vetting to Congress and have a congressional bill?  And why not -- I mean, what is the philosophy behind --
MR. SPICER:  Well, I don’t think it's a binary choice, Daniel.  I don’t think it's "only do this."  I think he has talked about -- especially in the area of immigration -- he's been very, very clear that this a huge priority for him.  And I think that he is going to continue to look at this from a holistic aspect.  In other words, visas, visa reform, the wall, our southern border, our northern border -- all of these things that -- you know, vetting.  Those are very, very comprehensive. And those things in which he can do through executive order and action, he will.  Those things that he can do through working with Congress legislatively, he's going to continue to do as well.
Toluse from Bloomberg.
Q    The President's top trade advisor, Peter Navarro, told The Financial Times yesterday that he believes that the euro is grossly unvalued, and Germany is benefiting from that and that's why we have a huge trade deficit with Germany and with Europe.  Does the President agree with that, that the euro is undervalued?  And if so, does he plan to do anything about it?
MR. SPICER:  I think when it comes to currency valuation, I'm not going to get -- I think we've got a Secretary of Treasury that's in the confirmation process.  And once that happens, I think then Secretary Mnuchin will be able to address that, as well.  
Q    Sean, Dan Hausle, 7News of Boston.  I'd like to ask you about Kelly Ayotte's role shepherding --
MR. SPICER:  I was hoping you were going to ask about the Patriots.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Well, I would like to ask you about that.
MR. SPICER:  You'll get a second -- (laughter) --
Q    Okay, I'll get a second.  But can you talk about Kelly Ayotte's role shepherding Justice Gorsuch around Capitol Hill?
MR. SPICER:  Sure.  Look, Senator Ayotte is someone who's respected on both sides of the aisle.  She has a lot of great relationships.  She's a former attorney general.  She understands the judicial process very well, but she's also -- I mean, this process is a relationship process by and far.  You're going around introducing a judge, someone who has not generally been exposed to the legislative process, definitely not the congressional process.  
Q    Her relationship with President Trump was stranger in the campaign, and kind of --
MR. SPICER:  That's right.  And I think that that goes and shows, as I've mentioned several times both through the transition and early, the President is not holding some kind of test about what degree of support you had for him.  He wants the best and brightest to continue to serve this country in whatever capacity they can.  I think Senator Ayotte very, very helpfully offered up her services.  She's got a lot of relationships on both sides of aisle.  She's got a tremendous amount of experience in this field.  And I think the President thought she was extremely qualified to do this to help shepherd this unbelievably qualified justice through this process.
And so she, as well as the team that we've gathered of individuals on staff here, are going to help get Judge Gorsuch through the nomination process.  And I would say, just as a side note, that if you look at the amazing job that has been done by the team during the transition and now to get these amazing individuals through the process, despite all of the hype that continues to go about this individual is going to face this problem, or which is the one person -- each of them have really sailed through this process.  And story after story says Democrats have tried to land a -- take them out and couldn’t land a glove.  They're unbelievably qualified.  They're unbelievably prepared.  And I think that the same process that we followed with this is going to be followed with Judge Gorsuch, and I think we're going to have a very speedy --
Q    As a follow-up -- as an unbiased Rhode Island native, can you offer your Super Bowl pick?  And President Trump has also showed quite an affinity for Tom Brady and --
MR. SPICER:  I will.  I think you know where I come down on that one.  
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Senators Murkowski and Collins both say they're going to vote "no" on Betsy DeVos's nomination.  That leaves zero votes to spare.  And Vice President Pence would have to cast the tie-breaking vote.  So my questions are, how confident are you that you have all of the other Republican senators locked down?  And what's the level of concern in the White House that her nomination is going to fail?
MR. SPICER:  Zero.  I am 100 percent confident she will be the next Secretary of Education.  She is an unbelievably qualified educator and advocate for students, teachers, parents.  I think that the games that are being played with Betsy DeVos are sad.  She is someone who's been a tireless advocate over the last couple decades to really support reforms that benefit children.  And they are going to be the real winners with her as the Secretary of Education.
Sarah Murray.
Q    In terms of both the two Republican senators who are voting no on Betsy DeVos and the outcry we saw from Republicans on the Hill last week -- earlier this week about how you guys dealt with the travel ban.  First, is there more that the Trump administration and Trump himself should be doing to ensure that his party is on the same page with his priorities?  And secondly, on the Yemen raid, can you give us more of an understanding of was there a discussion about the risks involved in this?  Was it a straightforward decision?  And do you guys still view it to be a success in spite of the death of a Navy SEAL?
MR. SPICER:  So first, I would just note, Sarah, that I've heard story after story in the last 40 days about how whether -- going back to the last question about these nominees and not getting through.  Rex Tillerson was going to go down and so-and-so was going to -- and every one of them, after they got to meet with senators of both sides of the party, have shown why the President chose them -- because they were unbelievably qualified, unbelievably ready to lead and enact an agenda of change in the area of responsibility that they're taking over.  And I think the same is going to be true for everyone else who is remaining.
Q    But two members of your own party disagree.
MR. SPICER:  The vote hasn't taken place.  I think we've had some concerns in the past and I think when these nominees have met with them and shared with them their thoughts throughout the process -- and, again, you can go back, story after story, and again, each one of these folks who I've heard isn't going to make it, is going to go over the finish line each time.  And I think that -- we hear it over and over again and yet we succeed every time.  And yet, another roadblock is put up -- well, this person won't succeed.  And yet, you look at each one of these people going through the process and it's worked beautifully every time.  And I think we're going to continue that path.
With respect to Yemen, I think it's hard to ever say something was successful when you lose a life.  But you've got to understand that Chief Owens -- he went back, deployed 12 times, because he loved this country and he believed in the mission.  And knowing that we killed an estimated 14 AQAP members and that we gathered an unbelievable amount of intelligence that will prevent the potential deaths or attacks on American soil is something that I think most servicemembers understand that that's why they join the service.
And so you never want to call something a success, 100 percent, when someone is hurt or killed, and that was the case here, but I think that when you recognize that an individual like this loved this country so much and deployed over and over again because he knew that the mission that he was conducting was so important to our protection, our freedom, our safety.  And I know that when the President spoke to Karen, his wife, and talked about the three children that he left behind, she continued to be impressed with -- to impress upon the President, rather, that while it was an unbelievably sad and emotional time for her and her family, that he loved doing this.
And so, again, I don't think you ever call anything 100 percent success, but what he did for this nation and what we got out of that mission, I think I truly believe -- and I know the President believes -- it's going to save American lives.
With that, let me go to the last question on Skype and then we'll continue.  Jeff Jobe of South Central Kentucky -- of the Jeff Jobe Publishing in South Central Kentucky.
Jeff.
Q    Thank you for allowing me to be part of today's White House press briefing.  Clearly, anyone paying attention will see that President Trump is aggressively acting on his campaign promises.  This in itself gives hope to my state and particularly the region in which I grew up, Appalachia.  We've seen countless politicians make promises at both state and national levels, and not only forget us, but to turn on us.  So my question is, how soon or when will the roles restricting coal mining, coal burning and coal exports be reversed?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Jeff.  I've talked about this a couple times so far, but I believe -- or the President has very clearly stated that clean coal in particular is an issue that's so important to our energy independence as well as our job creation in this country.  And so whether you're talking about Kentucky or West Virginia or Pennsylvania, or so many other places in this country that rely on coal, bringing the production of clean coal back is good for our energy independence, is good for our economy, is good for job creation, and is something that he continues to talk about.  And I think once we have the Secretary of Energy confirmed, that we can continue to take steps to move forward with.   
Q    Two questions for you.  After the primetime announcement last night, it seems like the numbers were good.  Do you have a sense that this President will be more aggressive than his predecessors on seeking primetime air play for his announcements?  And two, top Democrats are asking the Defense Department to investigate Michael Flynn's possible violation of the Constitution.  Do you have a -- it sounds like you saw that story.  Do you have a response to that?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think on the air time issue, that's something that we're not particularly suffering from when it comes to attention.  And I think the President does a phenomenal job of getting attention and getting his message out.  His use of social media in particular that when you look at the number of people -- I think we had something like 11 million people watching the address on Facebook Live last night.  Obviously if we have important issues to discuss with the nation, or announcements to make or nominations, then we'll request time.  I don’t think that that's something that we've spent a ton of time figuring out.  I think we're doing pretty well on that front.
And then, I'm sorry, the second question, Mike?
Q    The request from Democrats to investigate Flynn for a possible violation of the Emoluments Clause.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, so General Flynn, like I think probably countless, if not hundreds, of retired flag officers joins his speaking bureau, and has given speeches at various places.  And I think that is something that is kept in practice.  And the Department of Defense is the appropriate place for them to review it.  But as I said, I think that when you look at so many countless retired flag officers, that's something that generally keeps (inaudible).
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  General Flynn, when he was up here, offered some criticism about the Obama administration's handling of Iran in particular.  Is that something we should be expecting to hear more from this administration, whether it be on foreign policy or other issues -- criticism of the previous administration going forward?
MR. SPICER:  I think in area where there's going to be a sharp difference, in particular national security, in contrasting the policies that this President is seeking to make the country safer, stronger, more prosperous, he's going to draw those distinctions and contrast out.  But in this particular area, I think the President, when it came to the Iran nuclear deal, was very, very adamant in his opposition to the deal and to its implications.  
And so he's going to continue to make sure that the American people know that some of these deals and things that were left by the previous administration, that he wants to make very clear what his position is and his opposition to them.  And the action and the notice that he put Iran on today is something that is important, because I think the American people voted on change.  Again, this is another issue that he was very clear about.
So with that, thank you, guys.  I'll see you tomorrow.  Take care.  Have a good day.
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 2/2/2017, #7
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
12:32 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon.  Happy Groundhog Day.  We've got six more weeks of winter, apparently.  Luckily, for those of you who are going to be joining the President down to Florida this weekend, you'll get some time to get a glimpse of summer at the "Winter White House" in Mar-a-Lago.
The President is going to start his meeting at 1:00 sharp.  You probably just saw the b-roll of folks from Harley rolling on in, literally.  So I’m going to try to keep this a little quick.
The President signed a proclamation yesterday ushering in Black History Month.  He looks forward to an engaging and informative month of events honoring the enormous contributions that African Americans have made throughout our history.
Last night, the President was honored to host the swearing-in of the next Secretary of State, Rex Tillerson, in the Oval Office.  As the President said last night, Secretary Tillerson is a man who’s already respected all over the world for the tremendous life that he’s led, and now will bring his years of experience to the critical task of making our nation safer, more prosperous, and more secure. 
It’s time to bring a clear-eyed focus to our foreign affairs, and now with Secretary Tillerson at the helm of the State Department, we’ll do just that.  We'll strengthen our alliances, form new ones, and enhance America’s interests throughout the world. 
Speaking of the President’s excellent nominees, praise is pouring in from around the country for his pick for Supreme Court.  The Detroit News said Judge Gorsuch is a “legal superstar"; “an outstanding choice,” says the New Hampshire Union Leader.  The Richmond Times-Dispatch says the “initial reaction” was “to cheer.”  The South Florida Sun Sentinel touted his “excellent qualifications.”
Yesterday, Judge Gorsuch had his first round of meetings on the Hill.  Unfortunately, Senate offices aren’t in the habit of releasing editorials, but from everything we heard, the Judge knocked it out of the park on the Senate as well.  The President looks forward to a fair and speedy confirmation process for this exceedingly qualified nominee and jurist.   
In my last briefing, I read out a list of the senators Judge Gorsuch met with.  In addition to the meeting with Majority Leader McConnell, Majority Whip Cornyn, Judiciary Chairman Grassley, and Senators Hatch and Gardner, the Judge also met with Democratic Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia.  Recently, Senator Manchin expressed his belief that Judge Gorsuch could win enough Democrats to hit 60 votes.  I’ll agree with the Senator there on that one.  I mean, we have to have a few Trump-state Democrats who want to win re-election. 
But, as I pointed out yesterday, this so-called 60 vote “standard” is simply not accurate.  Democrats are grasping at straws to block the confirmation of an unquestionably qualified nominee.  I’ll repeat, neither of the two Supreme Court justices that President Obama put forward were subject to the 60-vote threshold.  So although I agree with Senator Manchin that Judge Gorsuch will probably get enough Democrats to get to 60, it’s just simply not ever been a requirement.
Now, on to the events of today.  The President started his day by attending the National Prayer Breakfast.  It's a tradition that continued over six decades, going back to President Eisenhower.  The President thanked the American people for their faith and prayers that have sustained and inspired him, noting that the five words that he has heard more than any others as he’s traveled throughout the country are, “I'm praying for you.” 
He spoke at length about the ISIS genocide against Christians and the oppression of peace-loving Muslims, as well as the threats of extermination against the Jewish people, and made it clear that he believes the United States has a moral obligation to speak out against such violence. 
He encouraged Americans to remain a tolerant society where all faiths are respected and where all of our citizens can feel safe and secure.  With that goal in mind, the President remarked that he's taken action to ensure that the United States will not allow a beachhead of intolerance to spread throughout our nation.  In the coming days, we will develop a system to help ensure that those admitted into our country fully embrace our values of religious and personal liberty and reject any form of oppression or discrimination. 
The President also committed to get rid of the Johnson Amendment and allowing our representatives of faith to speak freely and without retribution.
In a particularly poignant moment during his remarks, the President recalled yesterday his visit to Dover Air Force Base to join the family of Chief Ryan Owens as America’s fallen hero was returned home.  After honoring Chief Owens for giving his life in defense of the American people, the President quoted John 15:13:  “Greater love hath no man than this: that a man lay down his life for his friends.”
After returning to the White House this morning, the President held a legislative affairs staff meeting in the Oval Office with his team.  The team continues to work closely with Congress to enact the President’s agenda.  With the nomination of Judge Gorsuch to the Supreme Court, extensive outreach is underway on Capitol Hill and we look forward to the Judge receiving a swift and fair hearing.
Between his meetings, the President was pleased to see that EPA Administrator-designee Pruitt was voted out of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee.  As has unfortunately become the practice, Democrats again boycotted the hearing, requiring a suspension of the rules in order to advance his nomination.
Following the strategy session, the President met with Senators Hatch, Wyden and Congressmen Brady and Neal.  This meeting was an opportunity for the President to meet with the chairmen and ranking members of the Senate Finance Committee and House Ways and Means Committee to help chart the future of U.S. trade policy.  The President has put together an all-star trade team that will work closely with the U.S. Trade Representative and the committees led by these members to craft new trade deals.  
The President has expressed his concern time and again with NAFTA, which he believes is an out-of-date agreement.  The ultimate goal is to ensure the best and fairest treatment of U.S. workers and businesses, and the President believes that those interests are best secured by bilateral, rather than multilateral trade deals.  He looks forward to working closely with the USTR and Congress when it comes to issues of trade.
For those of you who weren’t outside and just saw the Harleys roll up, it’s no surprise that this afternoon the President will host a meeting and listening session with Harley-Davidson executives and union representatives.  For a list of those individuals, please contact our office. 
Harley-Davidson has been an American success story since 1901, when William S. Harley, at age 21, completed the blueprint drawing of an engine designed to fit into a bicycle.  In 1903, Harley-Davidson began building motorcycles in the United States. And today, the company has approximately 6,000 employees and $6 billion in annual revenue.  The company’s global headquarters is located in Milwaukee, Wisconsin -- which may have had something to do with them getting in so quickly.  And there's a certain staffer.
Today, the President will welcome to the White House the latest generation of Harley-Davidson executives to discuss how to make it easier for businesses to create more jobs and factories in the United States.  Beyond the company executives, representatives from the machinists and steel workers unions were also be in attendance.
Their motorcycles have carried our American servicemembers in war.  They carry our police officers that keep us safe.  They carry the Secret Service as they protect our presidents.  And they bring joy to millions of Americans and throughout the world -- and others throughout the world, rather.  The President is looking forward to hosting these leaders from one of America’s truly great entrepreneurial success stories.  The American worker built this country, and the President is focused on restoring a government that puts their interests first. 
A few administrative notes.  The National Security Advisor, Mike Flynn, today announced additions to the NSC senior staff.  David Cattler will be a Deputy Assistant to the President for Regional Affairs.  John Eisenberg, Deputy Assistant to the President, NSC Legal Advisor, and Department [Deputy] Counsel to the President for National Security Affairs.  Kevin Harrington, Deputy Assistant to the President for Strategic Planning.  And Kenneth Juster, Deputy Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs.
Lastly, we had a great reaction to our Skype introduction seats yesterday.  I know we've had a tremendous amount of requests pouring in from around the country.  Please contact the press office if you know of any that has an interest in joining us in the future.  
In terms of the schedule for tomorrow, the President will host a Strategic and Policy Forum.  Then, in the afternoon, the President will have lunch with General Flynn before departing down to Mar-a-Lago later in the day.
With that, I’ll take some questions.
Katie Pavlich.
Q    Hi, Sean.  Thanks for the question.  Today, President Trump talked about Christian genocide at the National Prayer Breakfast, and last year the Obama State Department officially declared a genocide by ISIS against Christians and other minority and religious groups in the Middle East and North Africa.  Now that Rex Tillerson has been sworn in as the Secretary, what specifically is the administration planning to do to comply with the legal obligations of protecting these groups under the U.N. 1948 Treaty?
MR. SPICER:  That's a great question.  I think Secretary Tillerson is learning his way around the building so far this morning.  He gave a great speech talking about his vision and goal for the State Department.  I think there will be further guidance coming out on that, Katie.  Right now, his job is to get in, get settled, talk to the employees, make sure they understood.  
But back to the issue, obviously it’s important to President.  It was during -- throughout the campaign.  It’s something that he addressed this morning, and is something that he is committed to.  He talked about it in terms of the executive orders, and allowing Christian minorities in key countries seek asylum in the United States.  He recognizes that, in so many nations, these are the oppressed groups in accordance with how the U.N. defines refugees.  So I think you’ll see further guidance with that.
Jennifer.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  I have two questions, actually.  Today, the President renewed his promise to protect religious liberty, which he says is under threat.  Some Americans see religious liberty as code for discrimination.  Can you kind of give us a sense of how the President views this tension?
MR. SPICER:  It’s an interesting question, because I do -- you know, this is something that comes up quite a bit.  I think there is a line.  We have freedom of religion in this country, and I think people should be able to practice their religion, express their religion, express areas of their faith without reprisal.  And I think that pendulum sometimes swings the other way in the name of political correctness.  
And I think the President and the Vice President both understand that one of the things that makes our country and this democracy so great is our ability to express our religion, to believe in faith, to express it, and to live by it.  And that’s where I think the important part is -- whether it’s a small business owner or employee, he wants to have some degree of expression of faith at the company.  And too often those voices get pushed out in the name of political correctness.  
So he’s going to continue to make sure that we not only speak up for it, but find ways in which we can keep that line a little less blurred and make sure that the pendulum doesn’t swing against people.  We shouldn’t impose a religion on anybody.  We’re free to express our religion or be -- you know, not have one.  That’s obviously, in our country, an equally valid way of living your life.  But at the same time, I think people who want to express their faith shouldn’t be ostracized because they want to live that. 
Major.
Q    If you could give us an example, if you could, of the pendulum swinging in the direction of political correctness.  And how is that going to inform the President with this executive order?  And as you may know, a draft is circulating around town and many have wondered if that is going to be a way to either silence those on the left or be a threat to the LGBTQ community.  Talk us through both of those.
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think if you look back to the Little Sisters case, if you look back to other businesses that were, under Obamacare --
Q    Would you put Hobby Lobby in that category?
MR. SPICER:  I would, yeah.  Absolutely.  I think there’s several businesses and several institutions -- Catholic institutions and others -- that have been mandated or attempted to mandate certain things that they may or may not do or how they have to treat their employees.  Those are instances where clearly the pendulum is swinging a different way, where you are not carving out institutions or the ability for privately held businesses to conduct themselves to live according to their faith or their moral compass.  
And so there’s clearly a lot of evidence in the last couple years of the government coming in with regulations and policies that have, frankly, denied people the ability to live according to their faith.
Q    From the President’s point of view, that’s discriminatory in itself.
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think there’s -- like I said, I think it’s a pendulum.  And where the President is, is that he wants to make sure that you don’t penalize someone for wanting to express their faith, and that to the extent that we can keep that line a little less blurred and allow people who don’t believe in a faith or have an opposing faith, make sure that they are equally comfortable in the workplace.  But we shouldn’t penalize people or mandate them to abide by certain policies or regulations which are in direct contradiction to their faith.
Q    And what about the executive order, Sean?  
MR. SPICER:  There’s right now no executive orders that are official or able to read out.  We maintain that there’s nothing new on that front.  
Q    (Inaudible) drafted along --
MR. SPICER:  It's not a question of -- there are a lot of ideas that are being floated out -- I mentioned this the last couple days.  But that doesn’t mean -- part of it is, as the President does all the time, he asks for input, he asks for ideas, and on a variety of subjects there are staffing procedures that go on where people have a thought or an idea and it goes through the process.  But until the President makes up his mind and gives feedback and decides that that’s final, there’s nothing to announce. 
Q    Thank you.  In light of the tragedy that happened in Quebec City last week, which Prime Minister Trudeau is actually calling an act of terrorism, what is the President doing, what initiatives is he taking to make sure that that kind of homegrown -- because he was a Canadian citizen -- homegrown terrorism, homegrown violence doesn’t happen within our country?
MR. SPICER:  Well, there’s a lot of things.  Number one, he’s talked cyber -- I mean, he’s looking at it from every angle.  I think the first thing is to make sure that we look at our borders.  You’ve got to protect your own people first, then you’ve got to look at the cyber threats.  I mean, so there is a holistic approach to both immigration and there’s a direct nexus between immigration and national security and personal security that he has to look at.  
But then it’s a multi-tiered step.  You look at the borders, you look at who we’re letting in, and you also look at what we’re doing internally with our intelligence agencies and the FBI that make sure that we’re looking at -- whether it’s the cyber threats that we face or other terrorist activities -- but making sure that we’re working with the NSA and the FBI to be ahead of the curve, if you will.
Q    If I may, these are homegrown -- Oklahoma City was an American kid.
MR. SPICER:  Sure.
Q    Okay.  That’s all.  That’s what I’m asking.
MR. SPICER:  That’s what I’m saying.  But I think that, part of it is, looking at using the assets that we have here -- the NSA, the FBI -- looking at using the different agencies to see if we can get ahead of the curve and see things.  And a lot of times, that’s been a very big issue, is getting ahead of the curve for when there are telltale signs, having the reporting systems up, working with the various agencies.  But it’s a multi-effort process, if you will.
Kristen.
Q    Sean, thank you.  Why is the administration easing sanctions against Russia?
MR. SPICER:  We’re not easing sanctions.  The Treasury Department -- it is, from what I understand, it’s a fairly common practice for the Treasury Department, after sanctions are put in place, to go back and to look at whether or not there needs to be specific carve-outs for either industries or products and services that need to be going back and forth.  But I would refer you back to the Treasury Department on that one.
Q    Hold on, Sean.  The language on the Treasury Department website suggests that you are, in fact, easing sanctions that authorizes certain transactions with the Federal Security Service.  Does that not suggest a shift from what was put in place -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, it doesn’t.  
Q    So explain -- 
MR. SPICER:  It is, from what I understand, a regular course of action.  The Treasury does, quite often, when there are sanction imposed, but I would refer you back to the Treasury Department.
Q    Thank you.  Could I ask you to describe the tone of the call on the weekend between the Australian Prime Minister and the President, and also outline the President’s concerns about the refugee deal in question?  And I asked you this earlier this week, but could you clarify whether the deal is on or not?  Because the President tweeted last night “I will study this dumb deal," implying that he's still considering it.  
MR. SPICER:  Right.  The President had a very cordial conversation with Prime Minister Turnbull, where they went through an extensive discussion of this deal.  The President is unbelievably disappointed in the previous administration’s deal that was made and how poorly it was crafted, and the threat to national security it put the United States on.
He has tremendous respect for the Prime Minister and for the Australian people, and has agreed to continue to review that deal and to ensure that as part of the deal, which was always part of it, that we would go through a very, very extreme vetting process to ensure that every single person that is being offered up is coming here with peaceful intentions and poses no threat to the United States. 
So he has ensured that while he has respect for the Australian people and respect for Prime Minister Turnbull, that we do not pose a threat to the United States of America, that the deal that was cut by the last administration is something that he is extremely, extremely upset with.  He does not like it, but out of respect for him, he’s going to allow that process -- continue to study it and allow it to move forward under the conditions that have been set -- that there will be extreme vetting on every single one of those individuals.
Q    Just for clarity, the deal itself is still under review, so it’s not certain to proceed?  Or it will proceed as -- 
MR. SPICER:  Part of the deal was that -- the deal allows for the United States to vet the individuals that are being offered up to be processed.  The President’s goal is to make sure that every single one of those people, in accordance with the deal and as discussed in the telephone conversation with the Prime Minister, is subject to extreme vetting to ensure that no one puts it.  But I cannot underscore how disappointed he was in the deal that was made and how he thought it was just a horrible deal that was offered up by the United States by the previous administration.
Sarah.
Q    The President and his national security advisor have been clear the administration wants to put Iran “on notice,” but they haven’t specified what that is.  What options are on the table?  And are there any options, like military action, that might be off the table at this point?
MR. SPICER:  So I think General Flynn was really clear yesterday that Iran has violated the Joint Resolution, that Iran’s additional hostile actions that it took against our Navy vessel are ones that we are very clear are not going to sit by and take. 
I think that we will have further updates for you on those additional actions, but clearly we wanted to make sure that Iran understood that they are on notice, this is not going un-responded to.
John.
Q    Thank you very much, Sean.  
Q    It was a Saudi vessel.  
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  Yes.
Q    They thought it was an American, but it's a Saudi vessel.
MR. SPICER:  Right, that’s right.  John.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  On January 27th, at the Republican retreat in Philadelphia, Vice President Pence had a closed-door meeting with House Republicans where several of them brought up the case of IRS Commissioner John Koskinen.  There was an attempt to impeach him last year, which some of the leadership in the House felt was unfair to the commissioner, and they urged him to tell the President that given his entire record, he should fire him or ask for his resignation soon.  My sources said the Vice President said “I can hear you.”  Is there any pending action on the fate of Commissioner Koskinen?
MR. SPICER:  I have nothing to update you on.  
Hallie.
Q    On Yemen, it was initially described, the raid over the weekend, as a successful raid by the administration.  There are now some questions and comments raised about the possibility of additional civilian casualties.  So I’ve got a couple of questions for you on this one.  Would you still stand by your characterization of the raid as “successful”?  Was the President given multiple options about this raid, or just one?  And were there consultations with the prior administration’s national security officials, military officials about the raid moving forward?
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  Actually, I’d like to just walk through that.  I appreciate you bringing this up.
There is -- let’s go through the tick-tock on that raid.  On November 7th, CENTCOM submitted the plan to DOD.  Clearly, that was under the last administration.  Legal teams were involved immediately when it was submitted to DOD.  On December 19th, the plan was approved by the Department of Defense and recommended that it be moved ahead.  It was sent then to the National Security Council staff here in the White House.  Again, this all happened under the previous administration.
On January 6th, there was an interagency deputies meeting.  The deputies recommended at that time that they go ahead.  It was so easily approved it was sent straight up.  The conclusion to hold was, at that time, to hold for what they called a “moonless night,” which, by calendar, wouldn’t occur until then-President-elect Trump was President Trump.
On January 24th, shortly after taking office, Secretary of Defense-then Mattis read the memo, resent it back up to the White House conveying his support.  On the 25th of January, the President was briefed by General Flynn on Secretary Mattis’s recommendation and the status of the operation, or potential operation.
The President asked to see Secretary Mattis and Joint Chiefs of Staff Dunford.  He then, on that evening, had a dinner meeting, which included the President, the Vice President, Secretary Mattis, Chairman Dunford, Chief of Staff Priebus, Jared Kushner, Chief Strategist Bannon, General Kellogg, General Flynn, and CIA Director Pompeo where the operation was laid out in great extent.  The indication at that time was to go ahead on Friday the 26th.  
In the morning, the deputies committee met again.  It was not a necessary step because they had previously recommended and also reaffirmed their support for that.  On January 26th, the President signed the memo authorizing the action.  
So it was a very -- not only was it a very, very though-out process by this administration, it had started back on November 7th in terms of -- clearly well before that, but it was a move forward by CENTCOM on November 7th.  This was a very, very well thought-out and executed effort.
Q    Where was the President the night of the raid?  How did he learn about Chief Owens’s death?  And do you still stand by your characterization that it was successful?  
MR. SPICER:  The President was here in the residence.  He was kept in touch with his national security staff.  Secretary Mattis and others had kept him updated on both the raid and the death of Chief Owens, as well as the four other individuals that were injured.  So he was kept apprised of the situation throughout the evening.  
And again, I think -- I would go back to what I said yesterday:  It’s hard to ever call something a complete success when you have the loss of life, or people injured.  But I think when you look at the totality of what was gained to prevent the future loss of life here in America and against our people and our institutions, and probably throughout the world in terms of what some of these individuals could have done, I think it is a successful operation by all standards.
And again, I want to reiterate, it is tough to ever use the word "success" when you know that somebody has lost their life.  But when you go back and look at an individual that dedicated their life to serving this country, and went over and over and over again knowing that this not only the risk that he took but wanted to do it because he knew the threat that these kind of individuals pose to our country and to our people, that's -- while not a success that you lost to him, you know that he died in sacrifice for someone else here in this nation.
Hunter Walker.  
Q    Thank you, Sean.  I’ve seen some criticism of the President’s remarks at the prayer breakfast this morning.  Can you shed any light on why he thought that was a good venue to mock “The Apprentice” for its ratings?
MR. SPICER:  Look, Mark Burnett, the creator of “The Apprentice,” who is a long-time supporter of the prayer breakfast but also has a personal relationship, was there.  He meant it as a light-hearted moment.  And I think if you look at the totality of his remarks, they were absolutely beautiful.  And I think to hone in on that, it was a light-hearted moment he was trying to have with a big supporter of the National Prayer Breakfast and a personal friend.
Guys, I’ll be out tomorrow.  I want to make sure we all get to see the President now.  Thank you, guys.
END  
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 2/3/2017, #8
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
12:37 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon, everyone.  Happy Friday.  It's another busy day here at the White House and across the Trump administration.  
The first jobs report under the President's administration was released this morning.  It's National Wear Red Day, highlighting the importance of preventing heart disease.  It's National Catholic Schools Week.  And the President is going to be signing some executive orders, delivering some much-needed regulatory relief to lenders and borrowers in the next few minutes.
We're finishing up the second week here really strong.  Yesterday, another great deal was reached with Lockheed Martin for the purchase of a new lot of F35s.  Through the President’s intervention, a total of 90 planes -- for a lot of 90 planes; 55 were purchased for U.S. military that added up to a total of $455 million savings for U.S. taxpayers from the previous lot, with an average cost reduction of 7.5 percent, another big win that the President has delivered on for U.S. taxpayers.
Speaking of good numbers, let’s turn to the jobs report.  The economy added more than 227,000 new jobs, significantly more than the 175,000 that had been expected.  Today’s report reflects the consumer confidence that the Trump presidency has inspired.  According to a recent Gallup poll, economic confidence is at a new high, and ADP showed strong private sector hiring.  President Trump campaigned on how to make America work again.  Even before he took office, the markets knew he would deliver on that promise.  The President has already taken significant steps to turn our economy around, and he’s looking forward to ensuring that every American who wants a job has the opportunity to find one.
While the President is definitely pleased that the job growth has far surpassed expectations and that the labor force participation is rising, he also recognizes that there’s a lot more work to be done.  The President has a big and bold agenda to grow the U.S. economy and to create jobs.  In just his first two weeks in office, he’s met with more than 50 business leaders across a vast range of industries.  This morning, the President participated in a strategic and policy forum with business leaders from some of our country’s most successful companies.  The President understands the importance of an open dialogue with fellow business leaders on how to make the nation’s economy stronger.  His firsthand experience as a successful businessman helps to guide his decisions as President, and he will continue to seek opinions of other job creators while crafting an economic agenda.
All of these meetings are focused on one primary goal: providing new and improved employment opportunities for all Americans.  We’re looking at a full range of policy measures to achieve that goal: regulatory relief, tax and trade reform, empowering women in the workplace, rebuilding America’s crumbling infrastructure, and improving our education system.  
Also today, in pursuit of that goal, the President will be signing two executive actions as part of his plan to overhaul our financial and regulatory system.  I expect that to happen closer to the one o'clock hour.  The first is an executive order for posing guideline principles that sets the table for a regulatory system that mitigates risk, encourages growth, and more importantly, protects consumers.  
The Dodd-Frank Act is a disastrous policy that’s hindering our markets, reducing the availability of credit, and crippling our economy’s ability to grow and create jobs.  It imposed hundreds of new regulations on financial institutions while establishing unaccountable and unconstitutional new agency that does not adequately protect consumers.  Perhaps worst of all, despite all of its overreaching, Dodd-Frank did not address the causes of the financial crisis, something we all know must be done.  It did not solve the "too big to fail," and we must determine conclusively that the failure of a large bank will never again leave taxpayers on the hook.
The presidential memorandum addresses the burdens of government regulations and the Department of Labor’s fiduciary rule.  The rule is a solution in search of a problem.  There are better ways to protect investors, and the Trump administration is taking action to do so.  We’re directing the Department of Labor to review this rule.  The rule’s intent may be to have provided retirees and others with better financial advice, but in reality, its effect has been to limit the financial services that are available to them. 
President Trump does not intend to put unnecessary limits on economic opportunity.  The Department of Labor exceeded its authority with this rule, and this is exactly the kind of government regulatory overreach the President was put into office to stop.  We desperately need to overhaul how we approach financial regulation.  The President is taking action to protect American taxpayers and get people back to work.
Moving on, we announced earlier this week that we would be taking steps to address Iran’s recent actions.  Today, the U.S. sanctioned 25 individuals and entities that provide support to Iran’s ballistic missile program and the Islamic Revolutionary Quds Force.  These designations are in response to Iran’s ongoing ballistic missile program, including its ballistic missile test on January 29, 2017, as well as Iran’s continued support for terrorism.  We’ve taken these actions today, after careful consideration, and will continue to respond with appropriate action.
These designations mark yet another stop in our continued effort to aggressively target Iran’s ballistic missile program and terrorism-related activities.  Over at the Department of Defense, Secretary Mattis is on the final day of a two-day trip through Asia.  He visited Korea yesterday and Japan today, returning to Washington tomorrow.  Secretary Mattis’s visit emphasizes the priority President Trump places on the Asia-Pacific, and on strengthening the U.S.-Republic of Korea alliance in the face of a growing North Korea nuclear and ballistic missile threat.
Over in the Senate, the President now has 11 Cabinet nominees awaiting a full Senate vote on their confirmations.  We look forward to welcoming these individuals into the administration.
Regarding the weekend’s plans, the President will debut his second weekly Facebook Live event this evening at 5 o’clock.  You can expect him to recap another week of action on behalf of the American people.  He’ll also comment on his selection of Judge Neil Gorsuch to be the next Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.  And while recognizing Black History Month, he will discuss his vision to deliver more opportunity and safety for the African-American community.
One more note of this week’s address:  the lead-in to the President’s remark on Facebook Live will feature some of the incredible artwork throughout the White House that was created by African American artists, so you definitely don’t want to miss this.
As I mentioned previously, this weekend the President will be shifting the operation of the White House down to the “Winter White House” at Mar-a-Lago.  While in Florida, he’ll hold meetings and calls with advisors and staff to plan for another big week of action on behalf of the American people.  We’ll provide readouts of these as they occur.  By our count, as of this morning the administration has already racked up more than 60 significant actions:  21 executive actions, 16 meetings with foreign leaders, and 10 stakeholder meetings, to name a few.  
We’re looking forward to another productive week next week.
On Monday, the President will visit Central Command and Special Operations Command Headquarters at MacDill Air Force Base.
While at MacDill, the President will receive command briefings from both CENTCOM and SOCOM, have lunch with the enlisted troops, and have an all-hands address to personnel.  General Dunford and General Flynn will also be present for the meetings, and the President will return to Washington that evening.
With that, I’m going to go my first Skype question seat.   Jackie Nespral from NBC 6 in South Florida.  Jackie.
Q    Good afternoon.  On behalf of the viewers of South Florida, thanks so much for this opportunity.  You know, a lot of focus on foreign affairs this week, a new sanctions announced today against Iran, and of course Miami, as you know, is home to the largest Cuban-American community in the country.  And during the campaign, President Trump talked about his discontent with the warming of U.S.-Cuba relations implemented by President Obama.  And in the last days of his administration, he ended the "wet foot, dry foot" policy, leaving thousands of Cubans in limbo.
So my question is twofold.  A, has there been any contact between your administration and the Cuban government?  And B, are there any plans to change the current policy right now?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Jackie.  We are in the midst of a full review of all U.S. policies towards Cuba.  The President is committed to an agenda of ensuring human rights for all citizens throughout the world.  And as we review those policies in Cuba, that will be forefront in their policy discussions, but there is nothing that we have on that front at this point.
Francesca Chambers.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Today, the United States put new sanctions on Iran.  Previously, this morning, the President had said that they were playing with fire.  You said that appropriate actions would continue to be taken.  Is this the full extent of the punishing actions that we’re seeing right now?  And are military options still on the table in response to the administration saying that all options are on the table?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks for the question.  I think one of the things that the President has said throughout the campaign, during the transition, and since becoming President is that he doesn’t like to telegraph his options.  That’s how he believes that you can have a much greater successful option.  
So I’m not going to go into the full extent, and I think today’s sanctions really represent a very, very strong stand against the actions that Iran has been taking and make it very clear that the deal that they struck previously was not in the best interest of this country, and that President Trump is going to do everything he can to make sure that Iran is stayed in check.
Q    So it is possible that there are more actions coming, though?
MR. SPICER:  I just -- I would never rule anything off the table.  I think the President has made it clear throughout his time that that’s what going to happen.
Jeff.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  I wanted to ask about one of the members that has been announced as being part of President Trump’s team -- it's Gina Haspel.  Senator Ron Wyden has written to the President saying that her background makes her unsuitable to be the CIA Deputy Director.  And what he was specifically referencing was her role in the enhanced interrogation program that the CIA had during the course of the Bush administration.  Do you believe that this background is a disqualifier for that position?
MR. SPICER:  I think she has had an unbelievably distinguished career as a covert operative.  She basically gave up that to come out and serve in this role at the request of Director Pompeo, and I think she has been a very, very distinguished servant to the American people and is highly qualified for that position.
Next, I'm going to go to Josh McElveen over at -- from WMUR in New Hampshire.
Q    Hey, Sean, thanks for taking the question.  I know you're looking forward to the Patriots coming down in a couple of months -- a lot of people up here are hoping that happens as well.  Getting to business, though, for more than two years, the number-one public health and safety threat facing this state is the heroin and opioid crisis.  During the campaign, the President promised to be swift and aggressive when it came to this problem -- stopping the flow of drugs coming across the border.  Increasingly, though, the problem lies in synthetic fentanyl being cooked up in labs in the northeast.  What is the administration doing on that front as well as the treatment aspect of addiction?  
And secondly, if I may, with the understanding it is a state issue, New Hampshire is poised to become a "right to work" state, but the vote is expected to be close.  Given the administration's favorable view of "right to work," is it actively engaged in that effort?  And if not, what is the general message from the White House?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Josh.  First, on the opioid crisis, that is a major problem for not just New Hampshire but for so many states across the country.  I think one of the things beyond the health issue is to make sure that we're looking at borders use.  And the flow of heroin through our southern border is something that the President obviously takes -- that's part of his whole strong immigration stance, strong border security, having that wall built, having additional assets on the southern border will go a long way to stem the flow of illegal drugs into the country from our southern border up through the states.
It was obviously, as you mentioned, a big issue that he made in New Hampshire throughout the primary and continued so on the campaign.  And that's something that as soon as Tom Price and others are confirmed throughout the department, this has got a health component to it, it's got a border issue to it.  So there is a multi-government approach that needs to be taken to the opioid crisis.  
With respect to right to work, I think you accurately portrayed it.  The President believes in right to work.  He wants to give workers and companies the flexibility to do what's in the best interest for job creators.  Obviously, the Vice President has been a champion of this as well.  It's something that is a big deal in Indiana and something that he has championed as well.
Blake.
Q    Sean, I want to ask you about Dodd-Frank.  Beyond the executive order that's going to be signed here momentarily, is the administration planning on or working with Congress to overturn certain portions of the law itself that can be done with an executive order?  If so, what might that be?  What might that timeline be?  And can you say if a full repeal of Dodd-Frank is actively being considered or not?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think there's two aspects of this.  There's the administrative piece, which he's starting to address through executive action, and then there's a legislative piece that I think we're going to work with Congress on.  But I mean, I think I'd go back to what I said earlier -- that Dodd-Frank has been both a disaster in terms of the impact that it's had, but also it hasn't achieved the goal.  And I think that there's no question that the President talked about this extensively, the impact that it's had.  And it's not an either-or.  It's, frankly, just not doing what it set out to do.  And so I think we're going to continue not just to act through administrative action, but through working with Congress and figuring out a legislative fix.
Major Garrett.
Q    Sean, meeting with the Australian ambassador here yesterday with Chief of Staff Priebus and Steve Bannon -- can you describe what that meeting was about?  And did the administration make a commitment -- which we heard from the State Department yesterday -- that, in fact, all of those subject to the Obama administration agreement are still possible refugee re-settlers just with extreme vetting or some sort of process?  What was communicated?  
And on the Iran sanctions, Adam Szubin is the Acting Treasury Secretary.  He was, of course, in charge of sanctions at the Treasury Department before.  Oftentimes these are a long time in development.  Were these sanctions something that were kind of on his desk or have been identified, and that's what made them so, if not easy, available to enact so rapidly?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think those are -- I think you correctly pointed out -- I mean, he served in the last administration.  These kind of sanctions don't happen quickly, but I think the timing of them was clearly in reaction to what we've seen over the last couple days.  We knew we had these options available to us because they had been worked through the process, but we acted swiftly and decisively today because the timing was right.  So they were in the pipeline, they had been staffed and approved, and the President made the decision that now was the time to do it based on recent action.
Chief of Staff Priebus and Chief Strategist Bannon did meet with the Prime Minister yesterday.  I think they had a very productive -- 
Q    The ambassador.
MR. SPICER:  The ambassador.  Thank you.  Appreciate the correction.  They did have a very productive and candid conversation.  We have a tremendous amount of respect for the people of Australia, for Prime Minister Turnbull, and it was a follow-up on the call.  But we're going to continue to work through this.  We're going to honor the commitments that we've made in some way, meaning that we are going to vet these people in accordance with the agreement that happened.  And we'll continue to have further updates as we do.
John Roberts.
Q    Sean, your statement last night on settlements in Israel -- has there been a shift in U.S. policy?  While you said that you didn't think that they were helpful to achieving peace, you also didn't think that they were an impediment to peace, which would represent a departure from both Obama and Bush.  And there was no reaffirmation of a two-state solution in that statement.  So where are you on that?
MR. SPICER:  The President is committed to peace.  That's his goal.  And I think when the President and Prime Minister Netanyahu meet here on the 15th, that will obviously be the topic on that.  At the end of the day, the goal is peace.  And I think that's what you have to keep in mind.  I think that is going to be a subject that they discuss when they meet on the 15th, and that's as far as I want to go on that.
Q    Sean, back to the settlement thing.  What is your position on settlements in terms of whether or not they -- I mean, you said that they were not an impediment to peace, but you also don't want them building new ones.  
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    So where are you -- 
MR. SPICER:  I mean, I think the statement is very clear about that.  We don't believe that the existence of current settlements is an impediment to peace, but I think the construction or expansion of existing settlements beyond the current borders is not going to be helpful moving forward.
Trey. 
Q    Two for you.  Seventeen members of Congress requested that President Trump not interfere with the current way unemployment is calculated by the Department of Labor.  Does the President intend to comply with their request?  And a related question -- how many of the 227,000 jobs added to the U.S. in January does the President attribute to his administration versus the Obama administration?
MR. SPICER:  I think, look, when you look at the confidence indexes, I'm not going to get into -- unfortunately, we don't have that kind of a breakdown.  I think that you've seen the actions that he's taken, whether it's Carrier or some of the other companies -- Sprint, SoftBank.  Clearly there is a desire for companies to want to come be part of this Trump agenda and build and manufacture, create jobs, bring jobs back.  But I'm not at liberty to start parsing the BLS and other reports as far as where that comes down.  
But look, his team, led by Gary Cohn, was really pleased with the numbers this morning.  Obviously, we're pleased that we're -- 227,000 jobs is a great kickoff.  We hope they get better.  We know that there's a lot more work to do, and that's why the President continues to meet with business leaders, union leaders to help figure out how we can grow the economy.
Ashley.
Q    The government revealed in an Alexandria court case today that over 100,000 visas have now been revoked as part of the President's travel ban.  Does that include visa holders who are already in the United States?  And will the government begin finding them and trying to deport them?
MR. SPICER:  I'll have to get back to you on that.  I don't have all the details on that right now.
Q    Six hours ago, the President tweeted that professional anarchists, thugs and paid protestors are proving the point of millions of people who voted to make America great again.  Does the administration have any intention of investigating the groups who have been rioting at conservative or pro-Trump events?
MR. SPICER:  I think we know who they are.  I don't know that we need to do an investigation.
Q    Has the President seen the letter sent from Senator McCain yesterday?  And if so, is he looking into arming the Ukrainians?
MR. SPICER:  I don't know.  I'll have to get back to you on that.
Charlie.
Q    Ambassador Nikki Haley came out with a strong statement on Russia yesterday.  Does the administration have plans to keep the sanctions against Russia in place, or do they have any intention of adding more sanctions?
MR. SPICER:  So there's two things.  One, I think I commented the other day on the sanctions that Treasury put out.  Those are, in fact, routine -- or the clarification -- they are a routine clarification that occurs.  With respect to the sanctions, I think Ambassador Haley made it very clear of our concern with Russia's occupation of Crimea.  We are not -- and so I think she spoke very forcefully and clearly on that. 
If I can, I'd like to go to the third Skype question.  Christopher Sign from ABC15 in Arizona.
Q    Sean, thank you for doing this.  Hello from a sunny and beautiful Phoenix.  With the likely confirmation on the horizon with a new Veteran Affairs Secretary, there has been discussion regarding privatizing the VA.  There's also still concerns regarding wait times, even overall care and some reports regarding a suicide rate.  What is the reform that the administration is seeking here?  Also, will the administration protect whistleblowers?  
Second part of the question -- we've seen protests here in Phoenix, as in the nationwide as well.  When you talk about unity, what is the administration doing to bring more unity to the nation, and even more transparency?  As here in Phoenix, we saw that secret meeting on the tarmac.  How is the administration repairing all of this?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Chris.  First, I mean, I think the President, mostly through deed, continues to show that he wants to bring people together in this country, figure out how to move the country forward, both economically, job-wise.  I think that is something that he continues to show a desire for.  He talked about it in his inaugural address and the prayer breakfast.  
So I think he's going to continue to show through both word and deed his desire to move the country forward.  I'm trying to think -- can you go back to the first part?
Q    That's all right -- the confirmation -- the likely confirmation of the VA Secretary.   
MR. SPICER:  Oh yeah, Dr. Shulkin.  Yeah, look, I think first and foremost on VA reform, the number one thing is to get Dr. Shulkin confirmed.  And so many of these, as I brought up in the past couple days, it's hard to talk about how we're going to enact an agenda of reform when Senate Democrats continue to slow-walk some of these folks.  And I think that's a big problem.  Dr. Shulkin is the right individual to reform the VA -- to understand whether it's lending or medical care, the problems and the challenges that we face at the VA.  These are people who have served our nation and deserve the best care they can get, whether that's the mortgage lending, health care, or the variety of other stuff that the VA serves or provides to our veterans.  And I think that what the President has done is talk to people like Dr. Toby Cusgrove at Cleveland Clinic and other business leaders about providing a better approach to serving the needs of our veterans.  
Right now, you're right, there are still wait times that are unacceptable.  There's care that's unacceptable.  We've got to address that, and he's going to continue to do it.
David Jackson.
Q    Sean, during the campaign, candidate Trump repeatedly said he was going to void the Iranian nuclear deal.  Bottom line -- is he going to do that, or is he going to let it stay?
MR. SPICER:  I think today's action speaks for itself in terms of the sanctions.  He's made it very, very clear, David, that the deal that was struck was a bad deal, that we gave Iran too much and we got too little for it.  And I think that he is going to continue to be tough on Iran in a way that wasn’t done in the last eight years.  I think today's actions and the way that we expedited those sanctions are another example of how he's going to stay tough on them.
Let me go to the fourth Skype seat.  Dale Jackson from WVNN Talk Radio in Huntsville, Alabama.
Q    Sean, thank you very much for taking questions from outside the elite media bubble there in D.C.  My question is about immigration.  Donald Trump made this the forefront of his campaign, the foundation of it, yet the DACA and DAPA programs still exist.  And I learned from a member of Congress yesterday that the Trump administration is still issuing the work permits that (inaudible) individuals.  
Question one is, when are these programs going to be ended?   And question two, when will they stop issuing work permits to these individuals?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Dale.  I think as you know, Secretary Kelly just assumed office.  We are reviewing these programs.  We've made it very clear that we'll have further updates on immigration referring to DACA and DAPA.  The President has made significant progress on addressing the pledge that he made to the American people regarding immigration problems that we face, and I think we're going to see more action on that in the next few weeks.  
Yes, sir.
Q    Sean, yesterday the President described NAFTA as a catastrophe.  We've heard about his concerns with Mexico, but I'm wondering if you can outline some of the irritants that he finds along the Canadian border, and if there's any talk of a meeting with Prime Minister Trudeau.
MR. SPICER:  I think he has spoken to Prime Minister Trudeau.  I know that they're looking at setting up a time to come down.  We've been in constant contact with Canadian officials, and I think that will be a meeting that is set up very shortly.
Sarah.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Russia's foreign minister has pressed the administration for further details on the President's plans to establish safe zones in Syria.  The President has said to have discussed this yesterday with King Abdullah.  When can we expect further details on that plan?
MR. SPICER:  That's a good question.  I think that we are -- as you noted in the readouts from last weekend, that has been a subject that has come up with all of the Middle East leaders that he's talked about.  It's an area that he feels strongly about.  And I think as he continues to have follow-up conversations, we can expect further details.  It's something that -- Secretary Tillerson obviously just got sworn into office, -- that there will be further follow-up on that.
Yeah.
Q    The President will meet with Japanese Prime Minister Abe next Friday.
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    So what's the main topic for the meeting?  Will the President tell Japanese Prime Minister Abe that Japan should pay more and pick up all the expense (inaudible) in Japan?
MR. SPICER:  I think there's going to be a lot of both trade and national security.  I think as we get closer to that meeting, I'll have further information on it.  But right now, as you can imagine, there's an economic aspect to this, and then there's a national security aspect to this.  
Glenn.
Q    Sean, you have referenced polls a couple of times from the podium, but a poll came out today.  CBS says the President has a 40 percent approval rating.  We've seen the approval rating drop during the transition period.  He talked about polls a great deal during the campaign.  A, what do you think that says about the way the American people are looking at these actions that he's taking?  And, B, what do you think it says about his pledge to unite the country on the eve of his election?
MR. SPICER:  I think there's also a Rasmussen poll that showed he had a 51 percent approval rating.  You had an Ipsos/Reuters poll that other day that showed -- and again, I don’t have it handy, but a majority of people approved --
Q    (Inaudible) those.  
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And I think that as the President's policies continue to get enacted, for all the hysteria regarding his efforts to protect the country, on those seven countries where we didn’t have the proper vetting in place to ensure that the American people were safe, what we did have was a very high response from the American people in support of that.  His policies continue to do it.  The President understands this is a marathon, and not a sprint.  And as he continues to get people back to work, protect this country, I think the poll numbers will act in accord.
Q    Sean, you mentioned the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.  Does the administration intend to keep Richard Cordray as the head of that agency?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t have a staff announcement on the CFPB right now, but we'll see where we go.
Q    You criticize the bureau broadly, but do you want to see it stay in place?
MR. SPICER:  I think we'll have further updates on that.  That's an area that we need to work with Congress on.
April.
Q    Okay, Sean, two things.  One, you said something about President Trump talking on the Facebook Live that he was going to talk about Black History Month and issues pertaining to the African American community.  When you first came, a couple days into the administration, I asked you about the agenda, the black agenda that he had possibly formulated or he was formulating as he came out maybe the day before with the issue of Chicago, or the day after -- something around that time -- Chicago and sending the Feds in if it doesn’t change.  Has he now formulated a plan to deal with the black community, not just with issues of law and order?  What is that --
MR. SPICER:  I mean, he had a meeting with African American leaders the other day in the Roosevelt Room.  I think part of this is, to your point, it isn’t just law and order -- it's jobs, it's education, it's health care, small business lending.  There's a lot that goes along with that agenda.  And I think part of these business meetings they have are about hiring and small business and job creation.  All of those issues, I think, are at the forefront of small business -- or that community.  So it's not just a single thing.  I think that there's a lot, whether it's crime and law and order, or education, health care, small business, job creation.  That impacts that entire segment of the population, whether they're living in a rural part of the country or an inner city.  And I think that's what he's really focused on right now.  
Q    Sean --
Q    Wait, I'm not finished.  So he's now formulating the agenda?
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely. 
Q    Okay.  So the second question -- CVE.  What's on the table for that?  
MR. SPICER:  We're not getting -- I have nothing to announce on that right now.
Q    You have nothing to announce, but people are concerned --
MR. SPICER:  I understand people.  I understand we've heard a lot of rumors about what may or may not.  When we have something to announce on that, we will do it.  But I don’t think it should be any surprise that the President, when it comes to rooting out radical Islamic terrorism, which is what that initially was supposed to be focused on, he is going to make sure that that is a major focus of his -- keeping this country safe.  And so I don’t have anything further for you on that.  I'm just --
Q    What about excluding people -- there are reports about excluding white supremacists from --
MR. SPICER:  There are a reports.  I don’t have anything for you.  I just said I don’t have anything for you, but I will be very clear that this President's commitment to rooting out radical Islamic terrorism is something that is at the forefront of his agenda.  And I know that there's been a lot of reports about where that program or that effort is going to lie. 
Q    Is there going to be any kind of target on the issues of white supremacy?
MR. SPICER:  I have nothing else.  Thank you, April.
Cecilia.
Q    Sean, thank you.  The President has been using some tough talk, tough language on Iran -- "playing with fire."  Should Americans be ready for the possibility of military action with Iran?  Is that on the table?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I've said this before, the President has been very clear:  He doesn’t take options off the table but he understands the impact of something like that.  The sanctions today I think are going to be very, very strong and impactful.  And I hope that Iran realizes that after the provocative measures that they've taken, that they understand that this President and this administration is not going to sit back and take it lightly.  
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  On Monday, several published reports saying that it will be a tie in the Senate on the confirmation of Betsy DeVos for Secretary of Education, and Mike Pence will have to cast a historic tie-breaking vote as Vice President.  Should we be watching for any surprises?  Has the Congressional Affairs Office perhaps gotten one more vote from the "no" camp into the "yes"?  Or do you expect the Vice President to be on hand to confirm her?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I would say this:  Betsy DeVos, as I mentioned before, is an unbelievable champion of education -- for children, for teachers, for parents.  I hope that that vote gets 60, 70 votes.  She is an unbelievable, remarkable woman who has fought very hard to improve our nation's education system and to make sure that schools are serving children.  And I think that we are going to make sure we do everything we can, and we feel 100 percent confident that she will be confirmed Monday night and be the next Secretary of Education.
Thank you, guys.  Have a great weekend.  The President is about to sign executive orders.  I hope you all have a great weekend.  To those of you who can't travel down to Florida, we'll be gaggling on the plane on Monday.  Thank you.  Have a great weekend.  
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 2/7/2017, #9
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:42 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon.  Just before I came up, I wanted to let you all know that we're monitoring the severe weather that's going through Louisiana at this time.  The President is aware of the situation and is going to be reaching out to local and state officials throughout the day.
Also, yesterday evening, the President concurred with the FEMA Administrator's recommendation to approve Governor Bryant's request to add public assistance to the previously issued major disaster declaration in Mississippi.  Per the Governor's request, public assistance will be added for three counties -- Forrest, Lamar, and Perry. 
Yesterday, the President had an amazing day at MacDill Air Force Base, where he met with leaders of both Special Operations Command and Central Command, and then had lunch with enlisted servicemembers thanking them for their service and hearing the ideas that were on their mind.
The President announced his intent to make historic financial investment in the armed forces of the United States, showing the entire world that America has the back of all those who stand in defense of freedom.  As he has said many times before, the armed forces are at the very center of our fight against radical Islamic terrorism, and we must protect those who protect us.
The President kicked off today with a listening session of county sheriffs from around the country.  The President welcomed leaders from the National Sheriffs' Association to the White House and pledged to work closely with all members of the law enforcement community to keep the American people safe.  He assured the sheriffs that the Trump administration will make every effort to stop drugs and crime from flowing into the country, put an end to the opioid epidemic, secure the borders to keep terrorists out, and strengthen the bonds between state, local and federal law enforcement agencies. 
The sheriffs thanked the President for what they described as his "unprecedented" level of support for law enforcement and offered their full backing of his border security and immigration policies.  They expressed how encouraged they have been by the pro-law enforcement atmosphere that has swept the country in the wake of the President's victory. 
They also presented a letter on behalf of the National Sheriffs' Association, thanking the President for his “recent show of support for law enforcement, specifically on immigration and border security issues” and commending the President’s two executive orders for taking “significant steps to enhancing public safety.”
The group engaged in a wide-ranging discussion about the issues facing the law enforcement community, which the sheriffs said was an opportunity they hadn't been given under the previous administration.  The sheriffs closed the meeting by thanking the President for defending the rule of law.  And the President took them to the Oval Office to honor them and show his appreciation for their outstanding work they do to keep our communities safe.
A list of the attendees is available for those who are interested.  
After that meeting, the President held another listening session on how to best fix the VA.  It's a top priority for the President and this administration to ensure that veterans get the care they need when and where they need it.  Tragically, many of our veterans are being failed by a system that does not work.  This administration will reform and modernize the VA under the leadership of Dr. Shulkin, creating a culture of accountability that puts our veterans first.
The President welcomed the group to the Roosevelt Room and expressed his intention to take whatever steps are necessary to improve health care access and quality for our heroic veterans. Ms. Tiffany Smiley, the wife of a veteran who was blinded by an IED, detailed her family's difficulty and experience with the VA health care system, and offered suggestions to how it could be improved.  The President, VA Secretary-designate Dr. David Shulkin, and a group of health care experts and veterans advocates, including Ike & Laura Perlmutter, engaged in a wide-ranging discussion on reforming the VA so that the needs of veterans come first. 
The experts discussed private sector solutions and innovations that could be used to improve the VA.  The President praised the Secretary-designate for his commitment to veterans and thanked the group for their willingness to serve and do what was best for our veterans.  They plan to meet on a regular basis to discuss their collective efforts to improve the VA and its health care system. 
Also this afternoon, the Vice President had a big day on Capitol Hill, where he cast a historic deciding vote for Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos.  The President believes strongly that our nation’s success depends on the education of our students.  And Betsy DeVos has devoted nearly three decades of her time and talent to promoting educational opportunity.  As Secretary, she will ensure that every student has access to a good school, whether it’s public, private, parochial, charter, or any other kind.
The fact that we had to get to the point where the Vice President had to be pulled in to overcome the Democrats’ historic and partisan logjam of the President’s qualified nominee is another glaring reminder of the unprecedented obstruction that Senate Democrats have engaged in throughout this process.
The American people sent a strong message when they elected President Trump in November:  They're fed up with business as usual in Washington.  Democrats in the Senate should expect that voters will remember how they stood in the way of the President enacting an agenda that put him into office. 
Last week, I noted the President had a fair amount of Cabinet-level appointees awaiting a full vote by the Senate.  We’re looking forward to seeing more of the President’s picks to lead agencies and departments confirmed in the upcoming week, despite these childish tactics of the Democrats in the Senate, who would rather keep the failed status quo than allowing to put the President's people in place.
Also on the Hill today, Judge Gorsuch continues a full week of meetings with Republican and Democratic senators.  Yesterday, he met with Senators Tester and Feinstein.  Today he will meet with Senators Sasse, Schumer, Crapo, and Thune.  The President is looking forward to a full hearing for the judge, followed by an up or down vote on this incredibly qualified nominee.
At this moment, the President is meeting with Congressman Jason Chaffetz to discuss how to work together to enact his reform agenda.  Later this afternoon, the President will meet with Secretary of State Tillerson.  The President was obviously pleased to welcome and confirm -- swear in Secretary Tillerson in the Oval Office last week, and he's pleased that the Secretary is now able to bring his unique skillset and deep insights to the important work of the State Department.
Following his discussion with Secretary Tillerson, the President will have calls with Prime Minister Rajoy of Spain and President Erdogan of Turkey.  We’ll of course have readouts of both of those calls when they're completed.
This evening, the President will host young officers from the United States Army Special Forces Qualification Course in the Oval Office.  As the President said yesterday, members of our military and their families are our nation’s heroes.  It is one of his top priorities to ensure that the men and women of our armed forces have the tools, equipment, and resources they need to execute their mission successfully.  The President is looking forward to conveying his gratitude and support to these young brave captains.
Later this evening, around 6:00, 9th Circuit Court will hold oral arguments, per its order from yesterday.  I want to quickly run down what we can expect to happen tonight.  A career attorney from the Department of Justice will present an argument in defense of the President’s order.  And to be clear, all that’s at issue tonight is the hearing -- is an interim decision on whether the President’s order is enforced or not until the case is heard on the actual merits of the order.  It’s a simple status quo versus anti-status quo decision.
This is just like the case in Boston, which started as a temporary restraining order.  There, once we were able to explain our position, the court lifted the order and held that the President’s executive order could take effect.  As I have stated before, 8 U.S. Code 1182 gives the President constitutional authority for this executive order.  It says, “Whenever the President finds that the entry of any aliens or of any class of aliens into the United States would be detrimental to the interests of the United States, he may by proclamation, and for such period as he shall deem necessary, suspend the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens as immigrants or nonimmigrants, or impose on the entry of aliens any restrictions which he may deem to be appropriate."  We look forward to a final decision on the merits of this soon.
Looking ahead, I know a few have been asking for more details on Prime Minister Abe’s visit later this week.  As previously announced, he will visit the White House for meetings on the 10th of February.  The President has also invited him down to Mar-a-Lago, and the two leaders will travel there for the weekend.  This is a testament to the importance the United States places on the bilateral relationship and the strength of our alliance, and the deep economic ties between the United States and Japan.
Needless to say, the President is looking very much forward to welcoming the New England Patriots to the White House to celebrate their fifth World Championship.  It was obviously a spectacular game.
Lastly, we have our eyes on Kabul today following the tragic suicide bombing that killed at least 19 Afghan civilians and wounded 14 [41].  Just this morning, General Flynn spoke with the Afghan National Security Advisor to reaffirm our continued support for Afghanistan and for our Strategic Partnership.  We condemn this cowardly attack in the strongest possible terms, and we commend the Afghan security forces for their rapid response.  We also reaffirm our support to the Afghan government as they work to defend their people against enemies of peace.
And with that, I'll take your questions.  David Jackson.
Q    Sean, the list of 78 terrorist attacks that you released, it looked like it had been prepared well in advance.  I mean, was that already on hand when President Trump made his comments?  Or did you do it afterwards and plan to release it?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the answer was, we had been getting questions as to what the President's remarks were.  We wanted to be very clear that there are a lot of examples between 2014 and 2016 that have occurred, and many of them haven’t gotten the attention that they have deserved.  It’s becoming too often that we’re seeing these attacks not get the spectacular attention that they deserve.  And I think it undermines the understanding of the threat that we face around this country.
The reason the President has been acting in so many of the ways that he has with executive order and otherwise, the discussions that he had down at CENTCOM and SOCOM yesterday, are because he cares about making sure that we don’t have attacks in this country, that we’re protected, that we’re ahead of the curve.  And I think what we need to do is to remind people that the Earth is a very dangerous place these days, that ISIS is trying to do us harm, and that the President’s commitment is to keep this country safe.
And I think part of this is to make sure that the American people are reminded how prevalent some of these attacks and how much time and attention they have or have not gotten, but, more importantly, to make sure that they understand the unwavering commitment that the President has and the actions that he will take to keep the country safe.
Q    Was the list put together after his comments? 
MR. SPICER:  Yes.  Yes.  
Trey.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  On the call with Turkish President Erdogan later today, does President Trump intend to discuss plans for Syrian safe zones?  And does the President expect Turkey to help create those zones?
MR. SPICER:  I think we’ll have a readout for you on that.  I don’t want to get ahead of the two leaders’ calls. 
Alexis, RealClearPolitics.
Q    Sean, I have two questions for you.  You were mentioning that voters are going to remember how senators voted on the President’s Cabinet nominees.  Two Republicans voted against Betsy DeVos -- Senators Collins and Murkowski.  Did the President reach out to either of them?  And will he not forget what Republicans did in that particular nominee situation?
MR. SPICER:  I think -- look, the President has been very clear it’s not Republicans that have stood in the way of this nomination of all of these qualified individuals.  It’s been Democrats that have stalled over and over again, not attending hearings, trying to use every delay tactic possible.  It’s those people that have a problem, and I think that’s the message that the party has missed on the Democratic side, which -- and I don’t think that -- I wouldn’t paint it with a broad brush, because I think it’s Senate Democrats, frankly, that haven’t gotten the message.
Q    But he never reached out to them?
MR. SPICER:  Our team has been in contact with the entire Senate team to make sure that they understand and that they’ve had visits as requested.  But we have been in constant contact with the Senate, members of the Senate, their staffs.  Our legislative affairs team has had an extremely robust schedule of meetings with their teams to make these nominees available to them.
But I think the broader issue, again -- and with all due respect, I think it’s interesting that we’re focusing on the votes of two Republicans when you look at the spectrum of antics that have gone on in the Democrats.  I mean, the tactics that they have done over and over and over again to delay, not show up to hearings, filibuster to the extent that they can, run the clock out -- it’s not Republicans that have a problem here, Alexis.  It’s the Democrats that continue to do this.
Q    The second question has to do with the President’s remarks about the Affordable Care Act in his interview on Sunday -- because he indicated in his response, in that interview, that he thought that the repeal-and-replace was going to take longer, perhaps into 2018.  Can you clarify whether he is frustrated about this, what he is doing about the timing?  Because, of course, voters who sent him here were anticipating that this might move faster than he was conveying in the interview.
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think luckily -- and you saw Speaker Ryan’s comments earlier today -- I think we can have this done legislatively sooner rather than later, but I think the implementation of a lot of the pieces may take a little bit longer.
It’s a big, big bill that the Democrats passed.  As you recall, they told us we could read it after they passed it.  We are now going through this to make sure that we do this in a very responsible way, to make sure that health care, which is so vital to so many Americans and their families, is preserved while we put a new system in place that both lowers costs and increases accessibility.
But the President, I think, is very encouraged by the commitment and work that’s going on on the Hill to make sure that we get this thing replaced as quick as possible.
Fred Lucas.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  I wanted to ask -- actually, a follow-up related to that.  Speaker Ryan has actually said -- and I'm quoting -- with Obamacare you can’t “tinker at the margins and repair it.  You can't.  It is a collapsing law."  Do you agree with that?  And you can’t build on what’s already there, you have to get rid of the entire law?
MR. SPICER:  I think what we’re focused on is the end solution.  And I think we’ve been very clear over and over again that the President is going to repeal and replace it, and that what Americans will get at the end of this is a health care solution that, as I’ve said before over and over again, is going to give them a lower-cost health solution with more options.  That’s what they were promised in the first place.  That’s what we can give.
And I think the President, being able to approach this in the businesslike manner that he’s done so successfully in the past, is going to ensure that he negotiates prices, that we look at those business-like practices, force competition among states and other things that will help lower cost once and for all, and provide that competition.  
Q    On Iran sanctions, does the President have any concerns about the fact that Adam Szubin is the Acting Treasury Secretary in terms of implementing those sanctions?
MR. SPICER:  No.  We implemented them -- they went off without a hitch.
Fred -- I mean, John Decker.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  As you know, the President spoke over the weekend on Twitter and criticized the federal judge appointed by George W. Bush who imposed the nationwide restraining order.  He called him a "so-called judge."  Is the President, as it relates to the arguments -- I know you're confident -- but the arguments that will be presented this evening -- is he prepared to accept an adverse ruling by the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals?
MR. SPICER:  There's no question the President respects the judicial branch and its ruling, but I think that there's no way -- I just read off the U.S. code on that.  I don't think there's any other way that you can interpret that, that the President has the discretion to do what's necessary to keep this country safe.  And I think that's his concern, frankly, right now, is that when the law is such as it is, that anyone could interpret that any other way.  I think he feels confident, just like in the ruling in Boston, that we're going to prevail on this on the merits of the case because it is done so in a very lawful way.
Katherine.
Q    Will the administration take a position on the Israeli legislation to retract or illegalize the thousands of West Bank settlements?  Last week, obviously, you said building the settlements may not be helpful. 
MR. SPICER:  I think that, as I mentioned last week -- and I don't want to get too far ahead of this -- but Prime Minister Netanyahu will be here on the 15th.  I think that will be obviously a topic of discussion right now.  I don't want to get ahead of that.
Charlie Spiering.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Just a quick question.  Any response to the calls for impeachment by Representative Maxine Waters?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Hunter Walker.
I mean, I would just say, look, I think, look, it is -- the President is doing everything he can to move this country forward.  And I think whether it's the Democrats in the Senate who are trying to stall these nominees or these little political stunts on the House side, the bottom line is, I think by and large you see the support that the President is receiving for his policies throughout the country.  And it's because I think people recognize, A, that business as usual is over and that the President's commitment to both keeping this country safe, growing the economy and creating jobs is something that is welcomed by all Americans, regardless of party.
I think when you see stuff like that, I think it really just shows that they really missed the message that voters sent this past November.
Hunter Walker.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  CNN reportedly declined to interview Kellyanne Conway on Sunday because of the questions about her credibility.  Is the White House willing to offer alternative representatives to networks that refuse to work with specific spokespeople?
MR. SPICER:  Well, frankly, I think that my understanding is they retracted that, they walked that back or denied it, however you want to put it -- I don't care.  But I think Kellyanne is a very trusted aide of the President.  I think for any characterization otherwise is insulting.
I don't think -- if they choose not to work with someone, that's up to them.  But I think we're going to continue to put out key leaders of this administration, including Kellyanne, that can articulate the President's policies and agenda.
Katie Pavlich.
Q    Thanks, Sean, for the question.  Is President Trump planning to ask the Senate to expedite legislation allowing for the swift firing of bad VA employees?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President's commitment, as you heard both during the campaign and as he's talked to Dr. Shulkin, is to make sure that we're providing the best care.  And if there's things that are an impediment to that care being offered up or reformed, then he is going to make sure that we enact policies internally that make sure that people who are not doing their job, not servicing veterans, we can figure out how to expedite that process. 
But the idea that we're sitting around having a discussion about personnel inhibiting the care that veterans deserve really does not bode well for the reflection that we want on this country.  I mean, people who have served this nation -- we should be bending over backwards to make sure that the benefits and the care and the services that they, frankly, earned is something that is given the highest priority and is something that the President remains highly committed to.
Miriam Borgess.
Q    Hey, hi.  The President is going to speak later today with the Spanish leader, Mariano Rajoy.  And I would like to know how President Trump sees the relation with Spain, and which are the main issues they are going to discuss in their phone call.
MR. SPICER:  So I'm not going to -- we'll have a readout after the call, but I imagine that they're going to talk about a shared commitment to defeating ISIS and that they'll discuss our bilateral relationship and reaffirm our commitment to the two countries.  I think we will have a readout on that call with Spain as we will with all the countries and all the other leaders that we will talk to and we have in the past.  So I don't want to get too far ahead of it, but I would imagine that the current relationship that we have with Spain and our commitment to ISIS will be at the forefront of that.
Maria Peña.
Q    Yes, here, sorry.  Thank you.  It's kind of loud in here.  So it's a two-part question.  One, can you confirm whether or not the White House has accepted the credentials of the new Mexican ambassador, Gerónimo Gutiérrez?  And also Representative Mike Rogers, I believe, this morning said that he plans to introduce a bill to impose a 2 percent tax on all remittances that Mexicans send to their country to pay for the wall.  Would the President rally behind that bill?
MR. SPICER:  So, first, I would have to get back to you on the ambassador’s credentials.  I don't know.  We could check with the Department of State and figure that out.  I don't know that right off the top of my head.  
And I’m not going to comment -- I don't -- we don't put out statements of administration policy until the bill has gone through the process.
Hallie.
Q    Two questions for you.  One, following up on health care, the President, as you know, campaigned for 18 months on replacing the Affordable Care Act.  Where is his plan?
MR. SPICER:  He’s working with Congress.  I just answered that question.  But he’s working with Speaker Ryan.  Let me -- you're acting like -- 
Q    The specifics of it, though.  I mean, does he owe the American people something now given -- 
MR. SPICER:  And I think he’s been very clear that he owes the American people a result that's going to lower costs and provide more access.  That's what he continues to work with Speaker Ryan on.  I think the Speaker was very clear on it -- that they're having meetings both legislatively and at the principal level to make sure that this gets done.
And I think as you heard Speaker Ryan, we continue to be optimistic about getting this thing completed by this year.  It’s a mammoth bill what they passed and did it -- and I think we've got to make sure that we do this right.  We don't want to end up with the same result that Democrats did.  They rushed it through.  No one was able to read the bill.  And premiums have skyrocketed; access and options have gone down.  We need to make sure that we don't do this in a way that's going to end up with the same result.
John Roberts.
Q    I have a question for you, Sean, though, on Yemen.  
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    I did say two.
Q    One of the world’s most wanted terrorists is now taunting President Trump, calling him a “fool” after that raid.
MR. SPICER:  Right. 
Q    Any response from the White House?  And do you still stand by your characterization that it was a successful raid?
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.  That -- he was not -- that was -- the raid that was conducted in Yemen was an intelligence-gathering raid.  That's what it was.  It was highly successful.  It achieved the purpose it was going to get -- save the loss of life that we suffered and the injuries that occurred.  The goal --
Q    So you're pushing back on reporting that he was a target?
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.  He was not -- the goal of the raid was intelligence-gathering.  And that's what we received, and that's what we got.  That's why we can deem it a success.
John Roberts.
Q    If -- and I know that you believe that you have a good case on the merits to lift the temporary restraining order.  If the President does not prevail at the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals, will he take this to the Supreme Court?  
MR. SPICER:  Let’s see where we go.  I think he made it very clear that --
Q    Can I just finish?  
MR. SPICER:  Yes, you can.  I’m sorry.
Q    And is he concerned that if this does go to the Supreme Court with its current 4-4 makeup, that this temporary restraining order might become a little more permanent?  
MR. SPICER:  Well, remember tonight is about just a restraining order.  We're not -- 
Q    I know what it's about.  That's not the question. 
MR. SPICER:  Right, I understand.  But I think that it’s important to explain this to everyone, John, because I know you get it and so many others -- but I just want to make sure.  Tonight is about the restraining order.  It has nothing to do with the merits of the case.  And that's why I think we feel confident.  The question is:  Does the restraining order get lifted or not?  But regardless of what happens tonight, the merits of the case still need to be -- to discuss.  
And I think the merits of the case, as they were in Boston, are ones that we feel very confident on because the law is crystal clear on this.  The President has the authority to do this.  It was done so in an interagency process that ensured that all the appropriate people were consulted.  We went through that with flying colors.  I have zero concern that at the end of the day, we’ll be fine.  It’s just a question of going through the process.
Q    And I get all that, as you pointed it out.  But if he does not prevail at the 9th Circuit, will he take this case to the Supreme Court? 
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to get -- let’s see where it goes first.  I think our goal right now is to get to a point we can argue it on the merits.  We feel confident, based on how the Court has reacted in Massachusetts, that we're going to be good on the merits.
Jonathan Swan.
Q    Thanks for the question.  Does President Trump still plan to immediately terminate President Obama’s executive amnesties?
MR. SPICER:  With respect to what, DACA and DAPA?
Q    DAPA.
MR. SPICER:  I’ve said this before, we’ll have further updates on that.  Go ahead.
Q    But just in the thing, it said "immediately terminate."  
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  
Q    So I just wondered what the delay is.
MR. SPICER:  And I’ve made it -- and I’ve said before the President will have further updates on both DACA and DAPA very shortly.  We've been very clear on immigration -- what the President’s priorities would be.  As you heard Secretary Kelly testify in front of Congress today, there is going to be continued progress on the wall and on immigration as a whole.  So we're going to have plenty of time to address this.  
Right now, he’s trying to do it in a very systematic way in accordance to where we find the biggest problems.  And so he’s been very clear in the past that those who are in this country that pose a threat to us or with a criminal record are where his priorities are going to be first and foremost, and we’re going to move through the rest of folks that are in this country illegally.
Sarah.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Back to Iran.  The Ayatollah Khamenei said today that Trump has “helped Iran reveal the true face of America.”  He said Iran doesn’t fear Trump, and he encouraged Iranians to march in the street against America later this week.  Does the President have a response to those very aggressive comments?  And does he plan to take additional action against Iran if its leaders continue to escalate tensions?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President -- or the Ayatollah is going to realize that there is a new President in office.  This President is not going to sit by and let Iran flout its violations, or its apparent violations to the joint agreement.
But he will continue to take action as he sees fit.  The President has also made clear time and time again that he’s not going to project what those actions will be, and he will not take anything off the table.  But I think Iran is kidding itself if they don’t realize that there is a new President in town.
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  On Thursday, weather permitting, the President is going to meet with airline executives from throughout the country.  Two complaints from airline executives, as well as the Pilots Association, have been, one, that Norwegian Airlines got a special advantage, a foreign carrier permit from the Obama administration, and also that the airlines of the Arab Emirates are state-subsidized, and both cases are violations of the Blue Skies Act between the U.S. and the EU.  Is this something he’s going to address?  And is he considering upending President Obama’s foreign carrier permit?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, that will be something that -- that will be decided when they meet, what they’ll talk about.  Obviously, the President is going to want to talk about economic growth and job creation, how he’s enacting orders to make sure the country is safe.
On the case of Norwegian, my understanding, if I’m correct, that there is a deal in which they’re having 50 percent of the crews and the pilots are American-based.  They’re flying Boeing planes.  There is a huge economic interest that America has in that deal right now.  I don’t want to get ahead of the President on that.  But just to be clear, I mean, when you’re talking about U.S. jobs, both in terms of the people who are serving those planes and the person who’s building those planes.  That’s a very big difference.
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  A few minutes ago you said that the President wanted to remind the American people of how prevalent terrorist attacks are and that the Earth is a dangerous place.  That kind of breaks with the rhetoric we’ve seen bipartisan administrations use when it comes to terrorist attacks, encouraging the American people to go about their daily lives.  
MR. SPICER:  That's not the point that -- no, no, no, -- 
Q    Does this President have a different message to the American people?
MR. SPICER:  I think, yeah, his message to the American people is that he is fully committed to doing everything that he can to keep the country safe.  And I think that there’s a big difference between what you’re saying and the point that he was making yesterday.  And I think that what he’s getting at is making -- he was making a point as to the exposure that attacks get.  And I think that’s what he was getting at, is that we see these things and they’re becoming too prevalent.  
And that’s why I think he wants to become ever vigilant to make sure that we don’t ever get lax, that we need to be reminded that places and groups like ISIS continue to seek to do us harm, and that it is his job as Commander-in-Chief to do everything he can to get ahead of the curve and keep this country safe.
I think when you look at the poll that came out last week -- and I think it was 67 percent of the American people agree with his proposition to put further restrictions on people, to make sure that we have countries who are sending people to our country that they are coming here for peaceful purposes, and that if we can’t guarantee those countries have the proper vetting and systems in place when they are outbound to the United States, then we need to do what we can, and he will do what he has to as President, to make sure that this country is safe.
So I think there is a -- the point that he was making was not to put fear in anybody, but to, rather, reassure them that as President of the United States he is taking every single step to do what he has to to get ahead of the threats, to get ahead of the concerns so we’re not looking in the rearview mirror thinking, what should we have done, what could we have done; that we’re preventing lives -- whether it’s the raid in Yemen, the law that he’s enacting -- that he’s going to do what he can to make sure that this homeland and our people are protected and safe.
Mara.
Q    Thank you.  I just have two questions.  One on a tweet and one on health care.  When the President tweeted, “If something happens, blame the judge and the court system,” did he mean if a terrorist attack is committed by somebody from these seven countries?  Or any terrorist attack should be blamed on the judge and the court system?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the point that he -- the tweet is pretty clear.  But I think his point is, is that -- kind of dovetails what I was just saying to Zeke -- he’s doing everything he can.  And he walks into office -- there are seven countries that the Obama administration has already identified as not having the proper systems in place to guarantee our safety -- and I think his immediate reaction is to do what he has to do to make sure that we’re not looking back and saying, you know what we should have done, we should have made sure that we had stricter vetting in place for those seven countries.
So he took immediate and decisive action to make sure that this country and our people were protected.  That’s what he’s talking about, is making sure that we don’t have regret, that a month from now or two months from now or a year from now we hadn’t done something to protect people.  And so he acted as quick and decisively as possible to make sure that we put the systems in place to protect our people.  And I don’t think there’s any other way to read that.
Q    A question on health care.  Can I just get my second question?
MR. SPICER:  Of course.
Q    You just said he’ll negotiate prices, and that’s something he -- he ran on negotiating prices for Medicare, drug prices.  And I just want you to clarify where he is on that, because when he met with big pharma the other day, before the meeting he said, we have no choice, we have to get prices down.  After the meeting he said he would oppose anything that makes it harder for these companies to bring their drugs to market, including price fixing by Medicare.  So is he for Medicare negotiating drug prices, or not?
MR. SPICER:  He’s for it, yes.  He wants to make sure --  
Q    He’s still for it.
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.
Q    Okay.
MR. SPICER:  The President is clear -- I mean, when you look at the costs of -- not just drug costs.  The U.S. government has not done -- I mean, you look at what -- frankly, the easier way to look at this is what other countries have done -- negotiating costs to keep those down.  As drug prices continue to escalate, that drives up health care costs for every American.  But particularly, there’s a huge burden on America’s seniors who are so much more reliant on drug prices.  And in many cases you have people living on a fix income.  And health care costs -- rising health care costs and prescription drugs continue to be a burden on their ability to live out their lives in a much more enjoyable manner.
And so his commitment is to make sure that he does what he can, and I think rather successfully uses his skills as a businessman to drive them down.
Margaret.
Q    Sean, can you clarify two things?  
MR. SPICER:  Sure.
Q    One, Secretary Kerry -- Kelly, excuse me, when he was on the Hill today said that the administration right now is not looking at adding other countries to this temporary travel ban list.  Is the White House still giving itself room to add some countries to that list?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think what his point was is, is that right now, he’s not doing it.  You have to look at his testimony in context.  I think he went through the fact that we’re still in this review process, that he is committed to making sure that we look at all other countries.  But as of this moment, there is no immediate desire to add to that, but he is looking at all of the other countries, the procedures that we have with them, the systems we have in place to check them.  And so nothing is final until the end of the review period.  
Q    But I had a second question, sorry.  So you said still leaving room to do that.  Something that the President continues to say as a phrase -- and I’m hoping you can define it for us -- is that this is about testing who truly loves America and making sure that those who enter the country are those who truly love America.  How do you quantify that?  What is the President thinking of?  Is that a specific test?  What does that mean?
MR. SPICER:  No, I mean -- look, I think there’s a -- I think the President’s goal is to make sure that people aren’t coming here to do us harm; that they're going through the proper extreme vetting in cases where we don't have the information required to make a good judgment on them based on what their country is willing to provide; that we are taking the proper and necessary steps to protect our people.
But he doesn't -- if someone is coming here to do us harm or to espouse things that would give us a good indication that they're not coming here for the right reasons, then we need to do everything we can to, A, vet them and, B, unless we're 100 percent certain, keep them out of the country.
Q    It's a background check.
MR. SPICER:  It's a background check.  But again, I wouldn't just -- it's not.  I mean, it is -- to the extent that we can, it's going to be extreme vetting is what he's talked about; that it's not going to be just letting someone in on a quick check.  If there's any cause for concern, he wants to go to every step possible to make sure that people who are entering this country are doing so because they want to come here for the right reasons and for peaceful reasons.
Yeah.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  On South Korea, South Korea knows about Trump is very good friend of theirs.  And the (inaudible) most important part of his policy on South Korea? 
MR. SPICER:  What will what, please?
Q    What was most important part of Trump's policy towards South Korea? 
Q    The most important part of the policy -- 
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  Look, he had a conversation the other day and we look forward to filling that conversation.  I think obviously the threat of North Korea is the most prominent issue that faces South Korea in our alliance right now.  He wants to reassure the South Korean government, the Blue House, that we are going to do what we can to make sure that we stand with South Korea and that we prevent any further hostile actions from North Korea.
So I think that the safety of our country, of South Korea, of the region are going to be clearly the greatest focus of this.
Q    John-Christopher, Talk-Media News.  When the President submits his budget, is he committed to pushing Congress to approve sufficient funding for all American students to have either an outstanding public school education or the public funding for them to reach an outstanding private school education?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I think the President has talked extensively about education during the primary, whether it's an Associate's Degree, a Bachelor's Degree, a PhD or vo-technical education that we've got to give students these days the options they need for the workforce; that a vo-tech education in some cases is what's in the interest of students in terms of their success, and giving them the skills to work on cars or become a computer engineer or whatever.  
But as we head into -- as we look towards the future, we've got to make sure that we're preparing our students to have the skillset that they need.  And it's also the retraining aspect of that -- that as people get older and certain industries start to turn the corner because of technology, that we're allowing people the opportunity for retraining to give them the skillset that they need to reenter the workforce and continue to be productive.
So I think as you will see -- look, we literally will swear in the Secretary of Education hopefully later this evening, which we will let you all know -- probably around the 5:00 or 6:00 hour.  But that will be something that he's going to continue to have a conversation with Secretary DeVos about.  Something that she's made clear -- and it's unfortunate that we haven't been able to have this conversation sooner because it was held up for so long -- but I think that's something that Secretary DeVos will be speaking a lot about, about the education funding and skillset and opportunities that we give not just our children but people older in life who are looking to get back into the workforce through another avenue.
Q    How about the K-12?  How about the youngsters?
MR. SPICER:  I think we'll have plenty of time to discuss the President's budget as we get closer -- as he sort of develops that.  Today, we're excited that Secretary DeVos will get sworn in.  
Thanks a lot, guys.  Have a great one.  Take care.
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 2/8/2017, #10
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
1:48 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon, everyone.  Just a few minutes ago, as many of you had seen, we had another example of the real-world results that the Trump administration is getting in its pro-jobs agenda.  Intel CEO Brian Krzanich announced that his company is opening a high-tech manufacturing facility in Arizona that will create roughly 10,000 jobs between the factory itself and its supply chain, which is the latest wave in economic optimism that's sweeping the country following the President's victory.
In his inaugural address, the President laid out an ambitious vision to create 25 million jobs over the next decade.  From the beginning of his campaign, bringing jobs back to our struggling community has been one of the parts of the President's message that most resonated with the American people.  Having hired tens of thousands of people himself, the President is keenly aware of what prevents businesses from being successful and creating jobs in the current economy.
President Obama, by contrast, visited the same factory site where this factory will be built during his last reelection visit in 2012, touting the government incentives that were supposed to bring back jobs that had been lost to Asia.  President Trump knows that for business, the real government incentive is the government restraining itself.  For too many years, Washington has smothered industry in this country and under burdensome regulation.  This administration will set out to free businesses from constraints of government bureaucracy and regulation.  
Under the President's "Buy American, Hire American" agenda, the government is going to get out of the way of businesses to allow them to thrive.  Just last week, the President signed what we've been calling the "one in, two out" executive order requiring that every new federal regulation that's adopted, two be eliminated.  This new rule will provide much-needed relief for businesses who have been regulated and saddled with an absolutely staggering amount of additional red tape, as much as $1.9 trillion per year by some estimates.  
In 2014, the National Association of Manufacturers calculated that companies in every industry paid an average of $9,991 per employee to comply with federal regulations.  And it's only gotten worse since that study was conducted.  By relieving even a small portion of this burden, we will allow businesses to grow and hire more people.  Projects that have been stalled or scuttled are being revived in anticipation of the President's pro-growth policies.  Last quarter, confidence among CEOs of U.S.-based companies jumped by 4.2 percent points in the YPO Global Pulse Survey, one of the single-largest quarter gains in history.  This is only the beginning of the President's agenda.
Moving on to recap the President's afternoon and evening yesterday, as you saw, we officially announced the 24 people who will be serving in the President's -- in his Cabinet, on the White House website yesterday.  The President looks forward to having all these distinguished qualified men and women in place as heads of departments and agencies so that our government can start fully working for the American people and enacting the agenda that he brought forward during the last campaign.
The President spoke with two foreign leaders yesterday.  During his call with President Rajoy of Spain, the two leaders discussed our shared priorities, including efforts to eliminate ISIS.  The President additionally reiterated the United States' commitment to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and emphasized the importance of NATO allies and sharing the burden of defense spending.  President Trump also spoke with President Erdogan of Turkey, during which he conveyed U.S. support to Turkey as a strategic partner and NATO ally, and welcomed Turkey's contributions to the fight against ISIS. 
Last night, the President had an incredibly meaningful visit with current officers who enrolled in the Green Beret's Qualifications Course.  These young men and women will be at the tip of the spear serving our country in some of the world's most dangerous places as intelligence officers.  The President told these brave young soldiers how proud he was of their commitment, to risk everything to keep us safe, and how humbled he was to serve as their Commander-in-Chief, and that they could always count on him to have their back.
Also, yesterday, the Department of Justice presented its arguments before the 9th Circuit Court in the case concerning the temporary restraining order on the President's national security executive order.  Again, as I did yesterday, I want to emphasize that the issue before the 9th Circuit right now is extremely narrow.  The question is simply whether or not the President's executive order, which we maintain is fully lawful under the Constitution and U.S. code, should remain in effect while the courts actually consider it on its merits.  We expect the court to issue a decision on this matter soon, and we will have a statement once that's done.
Today, the President spoke before the Major Cities police chiefs and the Major County Sheriffs Winter Conference.  In his remarks, the President reiterated his commitment to a great national partnership between his administration and law enforcement.  While there are many things that the federal government can do to improve safety in our communities, it truly rests with the police officers, sheriffs and deputies who risk their lives every day on our streets.  And their mission is critical to the future of this country.  These brave men and women have a true friend in the White House.  And as the President said many times, we must protect those who protect us.  He will continue to do that throughout his administration.  
Later this afternoon, the President will participate in a standing legislative strategy meeting of his team here.  The team has been working around the clock to engage lawmakers and get the President's agenda moving through Congress.  
Yesterday, the Vice President attended the Republican Policy lunch where he discussed how the administration will work with the Senate to deliver results for the American people.  
Of course, the Vice President also cast a historic vote for Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos on the floor of the Senate, and then later swore her in in his office across the street.  
The larger intergovernmental affairs team is maintaining direct communications to state, local and tribal leaders so that we know what issues are affecting local communities.  So far, they've contacted all GOP state speakers of the house, state senate presidents, and attorneys general, and all but eight GOP state Senate majority leaders.  
Our legislative team is also obviously engaged in Judge Gorsuch's nomination.  He had another full day of meetings in the Senate with both Republicans and Democrats.  He met this morning with Senators Flake and Heitkamp.  And this afternoon he'll meet with Senators Cotton, Blumenthal, McCaskill and Heller.  We're also pleased to see another Democrat, Senator Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire, come out and say that the eminently qualified Judge Gorsuch deserves an up or down vote.  That brings up now to nine total Democrats who have come out and expressed a willingness to treat Judge Gorsuch fairly.  We hope more Democrats will continue to join their colleagues in fulfilling their constitutional duty to offer advice and consent on the President's nominee.
Also, on the Hill, we expect Attorney General-designate Sessions to receive a full vote on the floor of the Senate tonight.  As unfortunately has become commonplace in the Senate, Democrats once again spent hours last night in a counterproductive discussion about one of President's clearly qualified nominees, not to mention one of their peers.  Senator Sessions has a long and distinguished legal career, serving as both the U.S. attorney of the southern district of Alabama, and also as Alabama's attorney general. 
The President looks forward to Senator Sessions's return to the Department of Justice where he will continue his service to our nation as our chief law enforcement officer.  We also anticipate votes later this week on Secretary-designate Price and Mnuchin.
Finally, before I open it up for questions, the White House has spoken with the governor of Louisiana about the severe where in the Gulf Coast.  We've also made contact with the mayors of the affected areas.  FEMA is monitoring the situation around the clock and is in the process of deploying teams to support response and recovery activities.  At this time, there have been no additional requests for federal assistance, and we'll update you should that change.
With that, let me go to the first question from Courtis Fuller from WLWT NBC in Cincinnati, Ohio.  
Q    Good afternoon.  Cincinnati, among other cities, has recently voted to become a sanctuary city.  City leaders here are vowing not to enforce federal immigration laws without a specific request.  They also say they want to be open and welcoming to refugees.  My question today:  How will President Trump respond?  Will Cincinnati face economic or other sanctions, including, for example, funding of the Brent Spence Bridge, which he said he would fund when he was on the campaign trail?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Courtis.  As I've noted before, at the end of the day, this order is about two things: one, keeping our cities safe, and two, respecting the hard-earned taxpayers who send their money to the federal government.  And the President is going to do everything he can within the scope of the executive order to make sure that cities who don’t comply with it -- counties and other institutions that remain sanctuary cities don’t get federal government funding in compliance with the executive order.  I think more areas like Miami-Dade, down in Florida, understand the importance of this order, and we hope cities like Cincinnati and other communities around the country follow their lead and comply with that.
With that, Anita Kumar.
Q    I have two questions.  The first one is, can you tell us who is paying or how this is happening with Prime Minister Abe’s visit to Mar-a-Lago?  Who will be paying for that?  I asked the White House yesterday.  They referred me to State.  State referred me to the Japanese government who didn’t respond.  It seems as if the Prime Minister was paying and the money was going to Treasury, as previously discussed before.
MR. SPICER:  You mean when he travels here or to Florida?
Q    Mar-a-Lago.
MR. SPICER:  Okay.
Q    Then it seems the White House would know that.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, and let me get back to you on that.  We’ll follow up with you on the exact financing.  I’m not sure how that flows, but I’d be glad to find out.
Q    Okay.  Second question was, during the hearing yesterday that you talked about -- 9th Circuit -- there was some discussion about whether there needed to be a tweak to the executive order to make it clear that legal permanent residents would not be included in that, and there was some back and forth on that.  Will there be a tweak?  
Q    I think there was further guidance that I spoke about that went out, I think it’s been a week ago -- correct me if I’m wrong -- and talked about, we wanted to make it very, very clear that legal permanent residents were not included in that.  
But again, remember, we’re not talking about the merits of the order.  Right now, this discussion that happened last night and that the court will be ruling on is specific to the temporary restraining order and whether or not it should be maintained until there’s a further discussion on the merits.
So again, I don’t want to get into the legal nuances, but right now the guidance is very clear that was issued several days ago, if not a week ago, that this is not about legal permanent residents.  So I just -- that they are excluded from this, and I don’t know why there would be that discussion.  That clarification has been made.
Jeff.
Q    Sean, you said you’re not talking about the merits of the order.  Was the President this morning talking about the merits of the order when he called it “disgraceful,” the hearing that he heard last night?
MR. SPICER:  He wasn’t arguing before the 9th Circuit, Jeff.  Last night was a motion before the 9th Circuit on the temporary restraining order.  I think the President was very clear that U.S. code and the Constitution clearly give the President all the authority that is needed to make sure that he can regulate who comes into this country and prevent any acts of -- you know, anyone who is not coming to this country in a peaceful manner.
The code, 8 U.S. Code 1152* [1182], is very, very clear on this.  And so I think the President was pointing out the same issue that we had in Boston, which is, once we had a chance to argue it on the merits, we won on it.  And so I think that’s what he’s -- he clearly did not argue in front of the 9th Circuit last night.  So --
Q    But he called it “disgraceful.”  By calling it “disgraceful,” is that the type of language that should be used between branches of government?
MR. SPICER:  I think that the President, when you look at the U.S. code and how clear it’s written and the authority and power it gives the President to do what is necessary to keep this country safe and regulate who comes into this country, I think it’s a very, very clear reading, and the President was very -- I think he further went on and said, it doesn’t matter what level of education you’re at, I don’t think you could misread this.
So I think --
Q    But isn’t that insulting an appointee to the federal bench?
MR. SPICER:  I think he was very clear, Jeff.  So thank you.  
Daniel Halper.
Q    I was curious about the tweet that President Trump -- about his daughter’s brand, and then it was retweeted by the POTUS account.  What’s the standard that the President is doing in regards to his family businesses or that businesses --
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think this was less about his family business and an attack on his daughter.  He ran for President.  He won.  He’s leading this country.  And I think for people to take out their concern about his actions or his executive order on members of his family, he has every right to stand up for his family and applaud their business activities, their success.  
So, look, when it comes to his family, I think he’s been very clear how proud he is of what they do and what they’ve accomplished, and for someone to take out their concern with his policies on a family member of his is just -- is not acceptable, and the President has every right as a father to stand up for them.
I'm going to go to Norma Garcia from KXTX.
Q    Thank you.  In Texas there is a big push to penalize sanctuary cities.  In this state and other states around the country, there is a growing concern among undocumented immigrants whose lives are deeply rooted in the United States and have no criminal records.  My question is, is this administration ready to tackle comprehensive immigration reform?  If so, can you give us a timeline for it?  If not, what is the plan to deal with undocumented immigrants who live in this country long term?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Norma.  I think this has come up several times.  I don't think that anybody doubts the President's concern or priority that is placed on immigration.  He has talked about it -- when you talk about a comprehensive approach, he has talked about building a wall, he's talked about making sure we go after criminals in this country, he's talked about walking through the process and addressing DACA and DAPA in time.  I think this is a big problem.  There is no question that both on the security side and on reforming the current immigration system that is so clearly broken, that he is walking through this already, both in terms of executive action and then will continue to work through Congress.
So to your question about the timeline, I think he's already enacting several pieces of it and he's going to work with Congress to get further down that.
Eamon Javers.
Q    Sean --
MR. SPICER:  Hallie. 
Q    Two here.  Playing off of questions from Daniel here, on the business activities that you describe the President taking offense to, Nordstrom has come out and says this was not a political decision, it was a business decision.  Ivanka Trump, as you know, has said she has divorced herself, separated herself from the business.  So how is she being treated unfairly if she's not part of --
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think there's clearly a targeting of her brand, and it's her name still out there.  So she's not directly running the company, it's still her name on it and there's clearly efforts to undermine that name based on her father's positions on particular policies that he's taken.  This is a direct attack on his policies and her name.  And so there is clearly an attempt for him to stand up for her because she is being maligned because they have a problem with his policies.
John Roberts.
Q    Sean, just a second -- actually, to clarify that, the timing of that tweet?  It looked like it was right after his PDB -- during?  Can you just -- 
MR. SPICER:  I've heard the conjecture.  He was free when that happened.  Thank you for asking.
Q    Second question was on the lawsuit -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, that's two.
Q    Oh, I'm sorry, that was a clarification of the one.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Good, Hallie.
Q    The President tweeted today that if he does not prevail in the court, talking about the lawsuit issue, that we will never be safe, we will never have the safety and security we're entitled to.  What does that mean?  Does that mean that this is the only tool in his toolbox and if this EO gets batted down by the courts, we're toast?
MR. SPICER:  No.  But I think that when you -- and I mean, again, let's -- 8 U.S. Code 1182 says whenever the President finds that the entry of an alien or any class of aliens into the United States would be detrimental to the interests of the United States, he may by proclamation such periods as he shall deem necessary suspend the entry of aliens or any class of aliens or immigrants or non-immigrants, or impose on the entry of aliens restrictions he may deem necessary and appropriate.  
I guess at some point, if you don't look at that statute and say that the President has the power that Congress and the President have deemed necessary to keep this country safe, you've got to wonder how far you're going to allow that to get eroded.
So the point is, is that at some area, you've got to wonder if the President isn't able to execute on the power that's been vested into him and is codified in U.S. code, at some point you have to wonder what else is at question.  We have a President that acted 100 percent lawfully to keep people out of this country from seven countries that we did not have the proper information to ensure they were coming into this country with the appropriate means and motives.  If at some point the President doesn't have the power, as given to him in law, to protect this country, I think that really questions what a slippery slope we're on.
John.
Q    Sean, two questions.
MR. SPICER:  Of course.  (Laughter.)  
Q    The President said this morning that he paid very close attention to the arguments before the 9th last night.
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    But was he happy with the presentation that the DOJ attorney, August Flentje, made?  There was some concern by supporters of this extreme vetting program that he wasn’t strong enough.  He seemed to be searching for answers, particularly on the point of standing.
MR. SPICER:  I think there was a lot of back and forth during that entire argument.  He made some solid points, and I think that he did what he had to represent the President’s case and to represent the administration’s case on the TRO.
I think the President has really focused on the merits of this case, and looking forward to getting it back either to the 9th Circuit or to the lower court, or however it has to move.  He feels very confident on the merits, and that's where I think his focus has been. 
So I don't -- I’m not concerned.  I think the President’s main concern has been on the merits of this case and making sure that an executive order that was lawfully executed and went through the entire process -- remember we've got to go back and remember that the DOJ’s Office of Legal Compliance vetted this order, deemed it was legal.  So we've followed the entire process to make sure that this was done correctly, constitutionally, legally, and every otherwise. 
And so to now -- now our focus is making sure, whether or not we have to wait a day or two or whatever for the TRO, we look forward to the opportunity to discuss this on the merits.
Jen Jacobs.
Q    Whoa, whoa, whoa -- sorry.  Hold on.  Just as a point of clarification -- I’ve got a question -- 
MR. SPICER:  Now you're going with Halle's -- 
Q    So he is -- he was happy with his presentation -- 
MR. SPICER:  I think he is looking forward to the merits of this discussion.  That's where -- and I think he was pleased with some of the points that got made.  But his focus is on the merits of the order and making sure that ultimately we're able to do what we can to get this order back in place and protect the American people.  
Jen.
Q    The Muslim Brotherhood -- 
Q    Question two.  
MR. SPICER:  Look at what Hallie started.  (Laughter.)  
Q    We have reported that Russia has sent its biggest shipment of missiles ever to Syria.  Just wondering what the White House’s reaction is.
MR. SPICER:  I think I'll have to -- we don't have any comment on this at this time.
Jen.
Q    The Muslim Brotherhood.  Is it accurate that the administration is weighing -- labeling the Muslim Brotherhood a terrorist organization?  And will you do the same for Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard?
MR. SPICER:  I think there is no one that can question the President’s commitment to fully attacking and addressing the threat that we face by radical Islamic terrorism.  He has been -- made very clear during the campaign that the first step is understanding, knowing, and proclaiming who the enemy is.  And he’s going to do whatever it takes.
That being said, I’m not going to get ahead of any announcements that we may or may not have coming in the near future.  But make no mistake, the President understands the threat that our nation faces, and he’s going to do everything he can to attack it, root it out, and destroy it.
Cecilia.
Q    Thank you.  The President also said today that in the last two weeks he’s learned a lot, and that terrorism is far greater -- and that terrorism is a far greater threat than people understand.  That sounds like he is telling the American public that they have something to fear.  Is there a specific threat that he is talking about?  And should the American public -- based on that statement right there -- be fearful?
MR. SPICER:  No.  But I think the American people should understand that the President is committed to doing this.  We face a very, very real threat in ISIS and radical Islamic terrorism, and that we've got to do everything he can, and that the reason that he is taking the steps that he is, is because we must remain ever vigilant.  We can't let our guard down.  We have to be ahead of the curve.  And that the President is going to take the steps necessary to protect this country and its people.  And that the idea that we should sit back and not fully appreciate the constant threat that we're in, it’s week after week, month after month that we're hearing of another instance -- a lone wolf, et cetera, et cetera -- that is going throughout this country -- excuse me, throughout the world.  My apologies.
And so I think what the President is doing is trying to make sure that the American people understand that he’s doing everything he can to protect them and to keep our institutions and our people safe.  And so this is not something that we can rest on our laurels, that we can't understand.  He was just down at CENTCOM and SOCOM Monday morning getting a full briefing of the threat that we face from around the world and their motives.
And I think that that's something that he weighs very heavily on his mind when he meets with these people, gets these briefings, meets with the Green Beret soldiers, that he recognizes that there are so many people out there putting their life on the line to protect this country and to make sure that we understand the threats, and that it’s his job and his obligation to do everything within his power to take that information and do what he can to protect the country.
And so just to put a pin in it, I just want to be clear.  While we may not face an imminent threat today, we don't know when that next threat comes.  Is it next week?  Is it next month?  Is it next year?  But the President wants to get ahead of the curve and make sure that we're not talking about what we should have done, but taking every step necessary to make sure that it doesn't happen. 
Steve.
Q    But is the threat today greater than it was yesterday or last week?  Because that's what he’s saying.
MR. SPICER:  I understand what he’s saying.  What I’m telling you is, is that we shouldn’t ever be behind the curve on the threats this country faces.  We should make sure -- we don't know when the next one is coming.  We don't know when the next lone wolf is coming.  We don't know when the next attack is.  We've got amazing intelligence that's trying to root out and make sure that it doesn't happen again.  But what we can't do is wait for the next attack to come and say, I wish we had done the following.  And the steps that he's taken are proactively making this country and our people safer.
Steve.
Q    Sean, what was the White House response to the Republican proposal for a carbon tax floated today?  And separately, could you just set up tomorrow's meeting with the airline CEOs a little bit?  What do you hope to get out of it?  What do you hope to discuss?
MR. SPICER:  So I'm not going to comment on pending legislation.  We'll wait to see where that comes.  That's just not going to be a habit of ours to comment on every bill that gets introduced or marked up in committee until we have a statement of administration policy.  
And with respect to the meeting tomorrow, I'll have a further readout on that later tomorrow.  But I will say, in general, as you know, he's met with Intel just now.  He met with oil executives -- I mean, executives from the car manufacturers, manufacturing companies, technological companies, unions.  So these continued meetings that you'll see in the next months and years are going to be an attempt to make sure that he's sitting down with business leaders from around the country to figure out how he can use his office and this administration to further their ability to create jobs and grow the economy. 
So this is going to be more of a pattern.  You're going to continue to see him meeting with people who want to share that agenda to grow, create jobs, manufacture here, lift wages up here, bring benefits to good-paying jobs, et cetera.
Q    Should we take any significance from the fact that you did have this meeting about the carbon tax?
MR. SPICER:  No.  I just -- look, we're not at a policy -- we have nothing to announce on that.  
If I can go now to our next seat -- sorry -- we've got Josh Smith from WJHL in Southwest Virginia.
Q    First off, thanks so much for taking questions from journalists covering local news.  We appreciate it.  WJHL is in Northeast Tennessee and Southwest Virginia -- that is coal country.  And I have two questions relating to coal.  Then-candidate Trump came to Abingdon, Virginia last year and he made a bold promise -- if it helped to rescue the mining industry, that he would help to bring coal jobs and he would push back against environmental regulations.  
If the executive order last week was a first step, what specifically is the President willing to do, planning to do to make good on that promise to help the coal industry, to encourage coal production and use, and to deal with what some call its demonized image?  
And as a follow-up -- and I've got to ask two questions because when am I ever going to get to do this again?  What assurances can the President give those who hear him talking about him pushing back against environmental regulations and bringing back coal?  What assurances can he give those who are very worried about the impact on the environment?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that there's this -- well, I think when you hear him talk about coal specifically, it's under the guise of clean coal.  And I think the technology that we're able to utilize these days make it one of the cleanest uses of technology that we have.  And the President's point is that as we bring back this industry, we can do it in a way that is environmentally friendly and it becomes a great and greater energy source for us.
Just the other day, the Department of Energy noted that we expect I think it's about a 3 percent increase in coal production in this country, which is a noticeable reverse of where it's been in the past.  You mentioned the executive order and the talks that the President has had over the past year or so about his desire to bring back coal.  
Largely, that has to do with regulation that the EPA has put on existing coal plants that have ensured that they couldn't operate in an effective way to stay open.  I think the President is working with industry to roll back a lot of that and do it in a way that's environmental-friendly.  And I think that you can do that utilizing the technology you have and harness the power of clean coal, Josh.  Thanks.
Kristen.
Q    Sean, Yemen has withdrawn permission for the United States to run special operations in ground missions against suspected terrorists in the wake of the recent raid there that claimed so many civilian lives.  Does that not undercut the administration's ability to fight terrorism in that region?  And do you stand by your assessment that it's a success?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I'll take the last one first.  It's absolutely a success.  And I think anyone who would suggest it's not a success does disservice to the life of Chief Ryan Owens.  He fought knowing what was at stake in that mission.  And anybody who would suggest otherwise doesn't fully appreciate how successful that mission was, what the information that they were able to retrieve was, and how that will help prevent future terrorist attacks.
Q    But even Senator John McCain -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  I think my statement is very clear on that, Kristen.  I think anybody who undermines the success of that raid owes an apology and [does] a disservice to the life of Chief Owens.
Q    Are you saying that Senator John McCain owes him an apology?
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, Kristen, can I answer the question?  I'm answering the question.  Please let me finish.  The raid -- the action that was taken in Yemen was a huge success.  American lives will be saved because of it.  Future attacks will be prevented.  The life of Chief Ryan Owens was done in service to this country and we owe him and his family a great debt for the information that we received during that raid.  I think any suggestion otherwise is a disservice to his courageous life and the actions that he took.  Full stop.  I'm sorry, what was the first part?
Q    Is that your message to Senator John McCain?  He's called it a failure.
MR. SPICER:  That's my message to anybody who says that.  Anybody.  I just -- I don't know how much clearer I can be, Kristen.
Hunter Walker.
Q    Yes, thank you, Sean.  This morning, President Trump asked local law enforcement officials to help assist with deportations.  If he doesn't get the cooperation he's hoping for, does he plan to have DHS and CBP proactively begin deportations of undocumented criminals in the border zone?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that when you talk about immigration and what he's doing -- whether it's the wall or enforcing existing regulations or visa reform -- I don't think anybody questions the President's commitment to border security and immigration reform.  In fact, it's usually quite the opposite.  So when it comes to the steps that he's going to take, I think I've addressed this multiple times what his priorities are going to be, but you've seen Secretary Kelly talk about construction of the wall, his implementation of the executive order to keep people out.  There is going to be a considerable amount of action on this front -- on immigration and border security.  It started day one and it's going to continue through the last possible day until the President feels that this border is 100 percent secure and we've got the immigration system completely under control.
Q    Is defunding his only tool to get cooperation from the sanctuary cities?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I'm not going to get ahead of it.  I think when you saw the support and some of the side conversations that the sheriffs and police officers had, and the conversations that we've had beyond that, the sheriffs the other day, the support that they've issued on behalf of his executive actions and his agenda as a whole -- these are the folks on the front lines in many cases, Hunter, that are on the border, that see what some of this does and how it affects families and businesses, not to mention the cost that it is to both our country, in terms of what we have to do to support the immigration at our southern border in particular, but also the cost that it has on our economy and on jobs.
So you’re going to continue to see a flurry of activity, over and over and over again, to make sure that this President continues to show the importance that he puts on both border security and immigration reform.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Yesterday, on CNN, Kellyanne Conway announced that Prime Minister Trudeau is going to be here next week.  Can you confirm which day?  Have discussions on reviewing the Canadian part of NAFTA started?  And can you confirm that Sarah Palin is being considered as ambassador to Ottawa?
MR. SPICER:  So I will have further updates on the Prime Minister’s schedule either later today or tomorrow.  I’m not in a position where I can finalize that.  But we will have -- 
Q    And all the other (inaudible) --
MR. SPICER:  Guys, slow your roll.  (Laughter.)  So we will -- with respect to the ambassador, we have no additional ambassador nominations or announcements to make on that front.  I’m sure, at some point, we will have soon.
With respect to the agenda, as the President spoke with Prime Minister Trudeau a few weeks ago, they talked about trade and security and commerce, and I think all of that is going to be discussed at the time when the President and him further meet or discuss this.
Q    And I wanted to follow up on that if you don’t mind.  Just on NATO, Canada, of course, is one of the 28 member countries.  The President has been calling out countries that pay their fair share of dues.  What are his options if countries don’t listen to him?  And what does this really mean?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think -- look, every country is obligated to pay two percent of their GDP, and the President has made it very clear that, for too long, many countries have been getting a free ride.  When he has talked to these countries, and as I’ve just read out, both Erdogan and Rajoy -- he has addressed this not just with them, but to so many of the other NATO countries.  And, by and large, every single one of them agrees with that.  They understand the importance of NATO, and the President is very clear that in order for NATO to be successful, these folks have to pay their fair share.
Carol Lee.  
Q    I want to follow on Kristen, and then I just have a question on Turkey.  Does the White House have a reaction to reports that Yemen has revoked permission for the U.S. to do ground missions there?
MR. SPICER:  Yemen, more than most countries, fully appreciates the fight that we have with ISIS, and I think we’re going to continue to work with them to strengthen our diplomatic relationships and understand our fight against terrorism.  And so at this point, I’ll leave it at as that we understand that we share that commitment with them, and we’re going to continue to work with them to combat ISIS and to make sure that we do that.  I’m not in a position to go any further at this time.
Q    President Erdogan said today that the U.S. agreed to work with Turkey to take Raqqa.  Can you clarify what the President said to him in that phone call?
MR. SPICER:  I can’t.  I think the readout was as specific as we want to get with his conversation.
Q    What's his characterization of the conversation?
MR. SPICER:  I think the readout that we put out on Turkey was as far as we want to go with that.  Thank you.
Hold on, I’m going to go to our last one, Adriana Cohen, a radio host and columnist for the Boston Herald.
Q    Great to be with you, Sean.  Last night, Boston Mayor Walsh went on a television show to talk about sanctuary cities.  What does the President make of his vow to house illegal immigrants in Boston City Hall to shield them from the Trump administration?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President’s executive order is pretty clear when it comes to these kind of actions.  Again, I referenced it earlier in the briefing, but it’s twofold.  One is, there’s a concern about the safety of the American people and how we let people come into this country, and second, with respect to the American taxpayer.  And if we’re going to be sending federal tax dollars to folks to Washington, I think they need to be used appropriately.  And the President is going to do everything in his power to respect the money that taxpayers send to Washington and is spent facilitating legal activities and on American citizens.  
Blake.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Earlier today, the President said that the wall is in the process of being designed.  Given his previous background, is he or does he plan on being actively involved with the designing and the implementation of that wall?  And separately, last night, Elizabeth Warren -- any reaction from the White House on whether you believe what Mitch McConnell did was the correct thing?  Critics say she was silenced on the Senate floor.
MR. SPICER:  On the wall, I mean, the President is a builder.  He understands and I think he’s going to make sure that as this project moves forward, that he’s going to stay in close touch with Secretary Kelly to make sure that it fits his specs.  But he takes enormous attention to detail, and he wants to make sure it gets done right.  So I would expect that a project of this magnitude and one that is this high on his priority list will get the necessary attention from the President.
Q    And Senator Warren?
MR. SPICER:  I’m sorry?
Q    Senator Warren last night?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, look, I would refer you back to Senate rules.  I mean, this is not something that we tend to discuss here.  I’ll leave it to Senator McConnell and the Senate to discuss Senate rules.
Q    I just wanted to follow up again on Yemen.  Just not sure exactly what you’re trying to say here.  I seems like the report was that the Yemeni government has asked the U.S. to stop doing any ground operations with regard to AQAP.  Is that the request that you got from the Yemeni government?
MR. SPICER:  We'll have further information on that going forward.  I think we are in touch with Yemeni officials.  We’re working this through diplomatic channels.  But they understand the fight and the commitment that we both share when it comes to rooting out ISIS.  And I’ll have more information on that going forward.
Q    So can I ask on the President’s tweet, Hallie had mentioned on part of it.  The other part of it this morning was that there’s been a big increase in traffic to the U.S. from certain areas.  Can you say what certain areas he’s referring to, and what data is he leaning on?
MR. SPICER:  I’ll get back to you on that.  I’ve got to pull the data field on that. 
Margaret.
Q    Sean, two questions.  Turkey -- did the President dispatch the CIA director to Turkey as Turkish reports are saying right now?
MR. SPICER:  I just saw the CIA director, so if it happened, it hasn’t happened in the last hour.
Q    Okay.  The rest of that question was about -- this is part one -- about Gülen, whether there was discussion of extraditing Fetullah Gülen who Turkey views as a terrorist.
MR. SPICER:  I have nothing further than the readout at this time. 
Q    The second question, though, was about your statement -- "We don’t know when the next lone wolf is coming."  I believe, based on numbers, that the vast majority of lone-wolf attacks have been carried out by people who are either American, American-born, or naturalized American citizens.  So what specifically are you referring to there?  And what is he doing about those who are radicalized in front of their own computer screens?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I guess my question, Margaret -- I mean, I think there’s at least -- just for example, within the seven countries that we’ve talked about, there’s at least 20-some odd people that, over the last few years, have come into this country and been convicted of or charged with acts of terrorism.  So the --
Q    But the people who are lone wolves and radicalized here.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  But what I’m getting at is, you don’t know, I don’t know when is the next act, who’s going to commit it, how are they going to commit it.  The point is, is that you don’t look at odds and say, hey, let’s play the odds on American lives.  You do exactly what you can to present any attack from occurring.  And so I think you can go through any system and say, when was the last time that somebody committed a shoe bomb, and so let's not take shoes off.  The TSA --
Q    That's not what I'm asking.
MR. SPICER:  No, I get what you're asking.  You're asking, when is the next terrorist attack, and we don’t know.
Q    No, what is being done about people who are radicalized in the basement, in front of the computer screen, who are not affected by this ban.
MR. SPICER:  Right.  And I think the President has asked both for a plan to defeat ISIS from stuff that is coming in from this, and he's taking steps but he's also looking at working with the FBI and domestic intelligence agencies to gather the best information we can to prevent acts on our soil from people, wherever they may be.
Q    So something more is being done on that front that we haven’t heard about?
MR. SPICER:  He has tasked the FBI.  It is a whole-of-government approach to what's going on.  We're not looking at this myopically and just saying, these are the seven countries.  The whole point of that first executive ban* [order], and I know that's not entirely what you're asking, was to start with countries that didn’t have the appropriate vetting measures to ensure that they could come into this country.
As we move forward through this 90-day period, we're reviewing other countries, other options.  Those are the external threats coming into this country.  At the same time, the President has looked at options within the domestic intelligence gathering to figure out whether it's cyber or other ways that we can determine other ways to prevent or get ahead of additional threats that we might face in this country.  But it's not an either/or proposition.  It's a whole-of-government approach to what's going on.
Q    A bipartisan group of senators are introducing legislation -- and I know you don’t like to talk about legislation -- that would allow the Senate to sign off on a reduction in sanctions against Russia.  Would the President support such a check by Congress on sanctions?
MR. SPICER:  Well, there's two sets of sanctions, Tamara, that we got to deal with, right?  One is the ones with respect to Crimea.  And I think that Ambassador Haley has addressed that very forcefully at the U.N., that until Russia leaves Crimea, that those sanctions are a non-starter.  With respect to the other ones, I don’t want to get ahead of the legislation, if that's what that specifically is dealing with.  But again, we're not going to get into pending legislation. 
With respect to the sanctions that specifically deal with Ukraine and Crimea, I think that Ambassador Haley has spoken very, very clearly about that.  
Q    Sean, thanks.  The President said this morning in his address to the law enforcement officials, that he'll have a zero-tolerance policy for attacks against law enforcement officers.  As a specific policy proposal, what does that mean exactly?  More death penalty cases on the federal level?  What does he mean?
MR. SPICER:  I think that what the President said not just yesterday with his meeting with the sheriffs, but then today, is that he wants them to understand that he is a true friend -- they have a true friend in the White House, somebody who understands the dangers that they face every day by putting their lives on the line to protect the American people, whether it's pulling someone up for a traffic stop and not knowing what's in the car, or going up to a house to serve a warrant and not knowing who's behind that door.  These men and women, every day, day in and day out, are willing to put their lives on the line and make huge sacrifices.  
So he wants them to know that they have a true friend here in the White House that's going to have their back.  How that manifests itself going forward, I think the President will have further details as that moves forward.  But for right now, I think his number-one message to them was:  You've got a friend, he's got your back, let's do what we can to get these cities.  
I think the other thing that was important is that, you know, he mentioned Chicago.  Their crime rate -- their murder rate is up 45, 50 percent.  And in so many of these cities it's up.  It's unacceptable.  And I think the President is disgusted that so many American lives are taken, injured, whatever -- that we can't walk down the streets of our own cities in safety.  And I think he wants to make sure that they understand his commitment not just to preventing acts of terrorism from coming into this country, but also that whether it's gang violence or whatever, that people feel safe and that law enforcement is empowered to do what it can to keep our community safe, to work with communities, to establish policies that both respect our citizens but do so in a way that makes them feel safe and allows them to drive and walk down the streets of our city.
Charlie.
Q    Journalist Matt Drudge tweeted today that the Republican Party should be sued for fraud, basically upset about the lack of any legislation to repeal Obamacare or any tax cut legislation.  So what's your message to him and anyone else who's worried about sort of the big push in the beginning and who might be concerned that that momentum is stalling?
MR. SPICER:  I think it's hardly stalling.  I think it's a mammoth thing to repeal and replace.  I think there's no question the President's commitment to doing this.  You've heard Speaker Ryan talk about how we should be able to have this wrapped up by the end of the year.  It's a big bill.  It got jammed through, and it was very sweeping.  We're talking about one-fifth of our economy.  We can either do it quickly, as the Democrats did, and end up with a monstrosity where premiums go up, access is limited, or we can do it right.  
And I think the President, while he wants to get this done as soon as possible and understand what's at stake, he wants to do it right.  He understands how important health care is to American families and individuals.  And so his goal is to get it done right and have an outcome that achieves the goals that it sets out to do.  That's it -- plain and simple.
April.
Q    Sean, I have a series of questions.  
MR. SPICER:  Look what you started, Hallie Jackson.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Don't blame it on Hallie, okay?   Going back to the issue of policing, what happens when there is a situation -- you're talking about good policing -- but what happens when there are situations that we've seen over the last few years that have been highlighted with this accountability piece with cameras?  What happens when there is bad policing?  What does this President --
MR. SPICER:  Then we have to deal with it.  I don't -- I think the President wants to do what he can.  But again, I think you're right, we've got to have good policing.  But that's -- he wants to stand with them, talk about how we can do proper training, what kind of funding they need to do their job better.  In so many cases, the policy are asking for the resources because they've become fearful of making routine stops by preventing it.  
So I think it’s working with the police, integrating those kind of back and forth and having a dialogue in communities to make sure that we're doing it, as you put it, in a way that instills confidence in our citizens and our communities.  But we can do this right.  And we can make sure --
Q    So it’s not an either/or, though?
MR. SPICER:  No, absolutely no. 
Q    Okay.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no.  We've got to do this -- look, police officers from around this country on a daily basis put their lives out there, and I think that they want to keep communities safe.  Like teachers, they enter this not -- no cop signs up, or sheriff, because of the money.  Like teachers, they do it because they care about the community.  They care about making this country better, their community better.  But I think, in return, they should be provided the resources and the policies they need to do their job well and to do so that ensures that we have this back-and-forth dialogue with the American people that continues to earn the respect that they deserve for the sacrifice they're making.
Q    All right, the next question.  
MR. SPICER:  How many have we got?  Just so I --
Q    Maybe three -- maybe three more.  (Laughter.)  It’s Black History Month.  Let me go.  (Laughter.)  
MR. SPICER:  You can play that once.  (Laughter.)  
Q    I got a couple more days.  
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  (Laughter.) 
Q    All right, so listen, on the issue of last evening with Elizabeth Warren.  Coretta Scott King -- I want to get your reaction to these words that they're not allowed:  “Mr. Sessions has used the awesome power of his office to chill the free exercise of the vote by black citizens in the district he now seeks to serve as a federal judge.”  And she’s basically saying that Sessions has indifference towards criminal violations of civil rights laws.  What do you say to that?
MR. SPICER:  Well, obviously, we have a lot of respect for her and the sacrifices that she made, and the sacrifices that, frankly, she endured in her life.  But I would respectfully disagree with her assessment of Senator Session then and now.
His records on civil voting rights I think is outstanding.  And like Arlen Specter, the late Arlen Specter, I can only hope that if she was still with us today, that after getting to know him and to see his record and his commitment to voting civil rights, that she would share the same view that Senator Specter did where he said, “Although I voted against him, getting to know the man that is now, I regret that vote.”  And I would hope that if she was still with us today that she would share that sentiment.  
Because Senator Sessions’s records both as U.S. attorney for Alabama, as attorney general, and as senator has been one that has stood up for voting rights.  He prosecuted the Klan.  He stood up for Coretta Scott King getting -- for getting the gold medal.  He has been a tireless advocate of voting and civil rights throughout his career.  And I would just hope that if she was still with us today, that she would share the sentiments of former Senator Specter.
Q    Okay, and last two.  On diversity here, the administration’s diversity issues, you've been slammed on that recently.  I understand that there’s been a meeting.  Vice President Pence has been talking to J.C. Watts, Michael Steele and others -- if you can elaborate on that.  And also there’s a lot of groundswell about this HBCU executive order.  What’s going on with that? 
MR. SPICER:  So the HBCU presidents will be in town later this month as part of a national celebration.  We’ll have further updates on both the meetings that we may have with them, the activities surrounding that, in terms of the administration.  And then I think we’ll have further updates on it, as I mentioned with all executive orders.  We have nothing to update on that.
But obviously, the President has a strong commitment to them and understands over the last eight years they've been woefully neglected.  And I think he wants to really show a commitment in funding to HBCUs.  And so you’ll see I think not just a push this month, but in his budget and going forward.
Q    PLUS loans, Pell grants? 
MR. SPICER:  I think his budget will address a lot of these issues, April.
Q    The diversity piece, the diversity piece.
MR. SPICER:  And I think -- look, we're going to continue to reach out to a lot of folks to get their ideas and their input.  I think he’s shown that both through the transition and now.  But we're going to continue to reach out to people of different backgrounds, of different color, of different gender, of different economic -- socioeconomic, of different industry, of different parties.  The President I think continues to show a desire to reach out and talk to people who I think share an agenda of moving the country forward and doesn't really care about their background, their voting history, any of those other ideological traits.  If they share a commitment to moving this country forward and lifting people up, that's his end of --
Q    Sean -- 
Q    You mentioned the "one in, two out" order in your opening.  There was a lawsuit filed in federal court this morning challenging that lawsuit.  Is the White House aware of that? 
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    And what’s your response to it?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the lawsuit presumes a lot of outcomes that are widely inaccurate.  I think that it presumes that certain things would be part of the "one out."
The bottom line is, is that overregulation has stemmed economic growth and job creation.  Reviewing those to make sure that they are meeting their intent and not stifling job creation at the expense of whatever they were intended to do is something that should be smart and welcome by everybody.  
The idea that we're willy-nilly just allowing regulations to occur, but the lawsuit specifically, is wildly inaccurate.  It makes a ton of assumptions that call for speculation on what may or may not happen in the future.  And that's highly -- it's just subjective at best and doesn't have any basis in fact.
Thank you, guys.  Look forward to seeing you tomorrow. 
Q    More hands up here, Sean.
MR. SPICER:  I know, I'll see them tomorrow. 
END
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 2/9/2017, #11
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
1:53 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Here we go.  Good afternoon, everyone.  As you just saw, the President was honored to host the swearing-in of Attorney General Sessions in the Oval Office just a short time ago. 
Under Attorney General Sessions, the Justice Department will return to its original, core mission:  to uphold the rule of law to ensure that justice is administered and enforced fairly and impartially for all Americans.  Attorney General Sessions is a world-class legal mind and experienced prosecutor, and the President is pleased to have him finally in place as our nation’s top law enforcement officer.
After the Attorney General’s swearing-in, the President signed three executive orders dedicated to standing behind the police officers who risk their lives every day to protect us and our communities, reducing crime, and stopping cartel violence. 
The first executive order directs the newly installed Attorney General to develop a strategy for more effectively prosecuting people who commit violence against members of law enforcement.  We must better protect those who protect us.  Our men and women in blue need to know that we're with them 100 percent as they patrol our streets. 
Unfortunately, this has not always been the case.  Law enforcement officials have been vocal about the lack of support they received under the past administration.  This lack of support demoralized many officers and, in some cases, led to their discouraging their engagement with local communities, only causing further harm and deterioration.
It's imperative that federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies better coordinate and share information across jurisdictions to better serve and protect our communities.  This order will start the important work of doing just that, instituting a holistic approach that involves the whole of government.  It also directs the Department of Justice to work with other federal agencies to come up with ways to further reduce violence against law enforcement, and orders a hard look at how the Department of Justice and other agencies use their law enforcement grants. 
The second order establishes a task force, led by the new Attorney General, to reduce crime and restore public safety in communities across America.  Together, the members of this task force are going to come up with specific recommendations -- how we can change existing federal law to better prevent crime and improve public safety, and develop stronger working relationships with our state and local partners.  The President is confident that this task force will develop a systematic strategy to help further protect the American people.
Communities across our nation have been devastated by a surge in violent-crime rates, particularly in our major cities.  Over the last eight years, we've experienced declining focus on law and order.  Crime reduction will clearly be a priority for this White House.
The last executive order re-focuses the energy and resources of the federal government to dismantle transnational criminal organizations, such as drug cartels.  It's important to emphasize that we cannot reduce crime in the United States without additionally addressing illegal immigration and illegal drugs.  Through this executive order, the President instructs the Attorney General to form a comprehensive and decisive approach to destroying transnational crime organizations and drug cartels.
These cartels represent a clear and present danger to our nation.  They bring dangerous criminals, drugs, and violence to once-peaceful neighborhoods both here at home and in other parts of the world.  They have fueled addiction and overdose deaths, and they can no longer be allowed to operate with impunity in our country or our hemisphere.
This order pulls together the experience and resources of federal agencies to work towards emphasizing specific goals in this regard.  Number one, to upgrade our information-gathering about these transnational organizations and cartels.  Without accurate information about these threats, and the ability and willingness to share this information, we're not going to be able to tackle this problem.  
It's important to note that, prior to this administration, if you had called the Department of Justice to ask for these statistics, they never kept them.  So knowing what we're facing is a big part of addressing the problem.
Number two, improving the speed and efficiency of removing criminal aliens, cartel members, and people who help cartels from our nation.  Unlike during the last eight years, these criminals are finally going to go home.
Three, shift whatever resources we can to tackling these organizations and prevent them from disrupting our society any further.
Now, on to the President’s schedule.  This morning, the President held a breakfast and listening session with key stakeholders in the airline industry.  We've got a participant list if you're interested.  The President thanked the attendees for the 10 million jobs and $1 trillion in annual economic activity they contribute to our economy, and praised them for moving approximately 2 million passengers per day in spite of the outdated infrastructure and equipment that they have in terms of air traffic control and other infrastructure measures.
The President asked the aviation leaders what the government can do to help their industry grow and create more well-paying jobs for Americans.  The leaders commented that they had never been given the opportunity to truly work alongside the President in such an open and constructive way.  And they were unanimous in asking for the President to offer relief from the duplicative and burdensome regulations that are stifling job creation, which he assured them he'd do.
The President also reaffirmed his commitment to foregoing -- to forging, rather, public-private partnerships that will rebuild America’s crumbling infrastructure.  He pledged to work closely with the airline industry to modernize the technology systems that keep our nation’s airports running, and to expedite the approval process for future airline infrastructure projects.  It's the President’s goal to make sure the United States has the most advanced airline system in the world, and this meeting was an important first step in achieving that.
After the executive order signing, the President spoke with the President of Afghanistan and the Emir of Qatar.  My understanding is that we should have readouts shortly on both of those calls.  
Just concluding, a few moments ago the President held a Supreme Court and legislative listening session and lunch with Democratic and Republican senators.  In attendance were Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, Senator Chuck Grassley of Iowa; Senator Heitkamp of North Dakota; Senator Tester of Montana; Senator Donnelly of Indiana; Senator Manchin of West Virginia; Senator Moore Capito, also of West Virginia; Senator Cornyn of Texas; Senator Alexander Of Tennessee; Senator Coons of Delaware, and Senator Bennet of Colorado.
The President expressed his hope that these senators and their colleagues will give Judge Gorsuch a fair consideration and vote based on his qualifications to serve on the Supreme Court.  With over 100 federal judicial nominations potentially happening during this administration, it's critical for us to have open dialogue and work towards bipartisan agreement so that our justice system returns to its important work on behalf of the American people.
Later today, the President will speak with the Emir of Kuwait and the Prime Minister of Iraq.  He will provide readouts -- or we will provide readouts of those calls moving towards the conclusion of them.
We also anticipate that the Senate will hold a vote to confirm Secretary-designate Price this evening or into the early hours of Friday to be the next Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The President was glad to see that the Army Corps of Engineers announced last night the final easement for the Dakota Access Pipeline.  With this final federal authorization completed, and the President working to reduce further unnecessary delays, this infrastructure project can finally continue to move forward.  The construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline was one of the President’s campaign promises and the subject of one of his first executive orders.  The administration is pleased that Americans will be going to work building this pipeline, and building it with American steel whenever possible.
Now, looking to the upcoming schedule.  Tomorrow, the President will welcome Prime Minister Abe of Japan.  The President and the Prime Minister will hold a press conference at 1:00 p.m. in the East Room.  They will depart Washington around 3:00 tomorrow afternoon for Mar-A-Lago, where the President is honored to host the Prime Minister at the Winter White House.
As we recently announced just earlier today, Prime Minister Trudeau of Canada will visit the White House on Monday.  The President looks forward to a constructive conversation and strengthening the deep relationship that exists between the United States and Canada.  The President will also host Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel next Wednesday.  We’ll have further guidance on the press availability potentials for either one of those.  
One last thing before I take your questions, amid surging levels of CEO confidence and in the wake of the incredible jobs announcement made at the White House yesterday by Intel, there's also new numbers released today by the Department of Labor showing that unemployment claims are at near historic lows.
The President knows better than anyone what businesses need to create jobs, and the market is responding to his policy improvements.  This administration will continue to roll back burdensome regulations and lower the overall tax burden on Americans so they can hire even more people and create even more innovative projects. 
With that, I’ll take your questions.  Kaitlan Collins.
Q    Thank you.  Hundreds of bureaucrats at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau make more than members of Congress.  Forty of them make more than Vice President Mike Pence.  Does the President have plans to revamp this agency?  And if so, does he feel that he should be able to fire the head of the agency at his will?
MR. SPICER:  I think I've addressed this before, but we have no updates right now on the head of CFPB.  If we do, I’ll let you know.
With respect to the first part of that question, I think one of the things that you’re going to continue to see from this President is a respects for taxpayers’ dollars, the money they spend, and how they’re spent.  We are going to continue to review all aspects of government.  I think you’ll see further announcements as far as how he’s going to look at -- how he’s going to approach and innovate and update government.  
The bottom line is that we should be paying people a fair wage for their service to this country, but that we should doing it in the most effective and efficient manner.  And I think that’s what the President has already shown towards his commitment towards helping reduce the cost of several programs through the government and bringing back jobs.  But there’s going to be a respect for taxpayers in this administration, so that whether it's salaries or actual positions or programs, he’s going to have a very, very tough look at how we’re operating government, how many positions they're in, what people are getting paid.  
But the President understands that most Americans are out there working night and day trying to get by, and that Washington truly needs to respect the money that they spend, and that we should be doing it in a way that shows that -- with a level of respect in terms of how many people are hiring, what they’re paid, what programs we’re looking at, whether or not that program is duplicative.  But it’s not just about one department or one agency.  It’s really about looking at how government as a whole operates.
John.
Q    Sean, questions have been raised after Kellyanne Conway did an interview, I believe it was with Fox News this morning, where she appeared to, from the confines of the Brady Briefing room, promote the products of Ivanka Trump.  Do you believe that she crossed an ethical line?
MR. SPICER:  Kellyanne has been counseled and that’s all we’re going to go with.  She’s been counseled on that subject, and that’s it.
Q    And could I ask a question.  Reuters has a story out that includes a partial transcript of the President’s call with Vladimir Putin, in which he appears to express doubts about the New START Treaty.  Does he indeed have doubts about the New START Treaty?  Would he like to see that renegotiated?
MR. SPICER:  The President’s conversation with President Putin is a private call between the two of them, and I’m going to leave it at that.  We put a readout on the call, and we have nothing further beyond that.
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  One question today.
MR. SPICER:  Wow.  
Q    (Laughter.)  On February 2nd, Vladimir Kara-Murza, who is a well-known filmmaker in Russia and was a close associate of the late Boris Nemtsov, the dissident, found himself in critical condition.  His wife has since said she believes this is poisoning, very much like the conditions that almost took his life two years ago.  And does the administration have any comment about that, or the frustration of Mr. Navalny, the opponent of President Putin to get on the ballot as a candidate?
MR. SPICER:  I think our State Department is aware of the situation, we’re monitoring it, and I’ll leave it at that.
Blake.
Q    Sean, the President said today in the airlines representative meeting that he hopes to have an announcement within the next two to three weeks about lowering the burden of taxes for businesses.  At the Super Bowl interview, he was asked, can Americans expect a tax break in 2017, and he said, "I think so, yes.  I would like to say yes."  It sounds like he’s a little bit more confident for the businesses than individual tax breaks for Americans.  Is the business component at this point ahead of the individual component?  
MR. SPICER:  No, it’s a comprehensive -- yeah -- thanks for asking.  I think we’re looking at, in the next few weeks, rolling out the outline of a comprehensive tax plan that we’ll be working with Congress on that will address both the business side of the tax ledger as well as the individual rates.  But it’s going to be a comprehensive plan, something that we haven’t seen since 1986.
But I think when you look at the segueing of that, we’ve got two opportunities for reconciliation this year.  One is using the FY17 budget, which you can easily get Obamacare repeal and replace done, and then you can use the FY18 budget to utilize the second opportunity at reconciliation to do comprehensive reform.  But we recognize the need.  I mean, it’s been since 1986 that something like this, of this scale and magnitude, had happened.  
The President recognizes that middle-class Americans need tax relief, and that’s going to be part of that.  But we also recognize -- and you saw that in all of these businesses meetings, whether it’s inversions or other means in which people are shipping jobs overseas or reestablishing themselves or the profits that are kept over there -- we need fundamental, comprehensive tax reform that addresses both sides of that income stream.  
Q    Can you say if this is going to be a mix between what he had put out there on the campaign and what House Republicans had put out there before?  Because there’s some similarities but clearly some differences as well.
MR. SPICER:  I’m just going to say that you're going to have to wait a couple weeks before we put out that outline.  But I can tell you that it’s something that is going to spur economic growth.  It’s going to recognize the need to give so many working Americans the relief that they need. 
But more importantly, I think part of the issue that we continue to see over and over again with businesses is that we're facing competition from abroad because of our tax code.  It favors companies from not wanting to stay, and the President recognizes that.  And what he wants to do is create a tax climate that not only keeps jobs here but makes it -- incentivizes companies to want to come here, to grow here, to create jobs here, to bring their profits back here.  
So I think -- I don't want to get any further ahead of it, but I will tell you that it is going to be the first time that this nation has seen a full comprehensive tax reform in a long, long time.
Yes.
Q    Yes, the President this morning tweeted that our country is “bogged down in conflict all over the place.”  Where are we bogged down?
MR. SPICER:  I think there are several places that we've been -- 
Q    What does he mean by that?
MR. SPICER:  I think that if you look at ISIS in particular and the hotspots around the country, the places that we have to monitor, there's a lot of countries through the Middle East in particular -- Northern Africa -- that we are having to address and deal with and monitor because of the threat of radical Islamic terrorism.  
There's no question that the spread of it has gone -- in the last eight years has proliferated.  And I think that the resources that we have to spend -- this isn’t a traditional war where you're just looking at the other enemy with a uniform and saying, here’s the country we're fighting.  The proliferation of ISIS throughout this country has made it so that we have to focus a lot more in a lot more places and expend a lot more resources because it’s more of a disparate approach that we have to employ, as opposed to having one country that you're facing at one time.
Q    But “bogged down” suggests it’s something we can't get out of?
MR. SPICER:  I just answered the question.  I understand.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  And happy Lantern Festival to you.  
MR. SPICER:  Happy Lantern Festival to you.
Q    Thank you.  Regarding the very nice letter that President Trump sent to President Xi Jinping last night, I’m curious about the timing.  And also in the letter, President Trump said he’s looking forward to the event of constructive relationship with China.  So could you elaborate the importance of this bilateral relationship to the U.S.?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think it’s obviously important to us.  And the President understands that.  I think he’s spoken fairly often about China, and he understands both the national and economic interests that we have, the desire for our companies to access the Chinese market, but also the national security interests that we have.  And so he obviously wants to do what he can to have a fruitful and constructive relationship with China, and he looks forward to developing that as we go forward.
Sarah.
Q    Sean, the top U.S. commander in Afghanistan said today that they could use a few thousand more troops in Afghanistan to help the coalition efforts there.  Going off Mike’s question, if we're trying to get out of conflicts like that, does the administration plan to send those additional forces to Afghanistan? 
MR. SPICER:  I think the President will heed the advice of the generals and Secretary Mattis.  That conversation has yet to happen -- and if we have any further announcements.  But I think that's right now a Department of Defense issue that you should raise with.
Hallie.
Q    Sean, two questions for you.  I want to get to one on immigration.  But first on the comments from Judge Gorsuch that have been reported out, I just have a two-parter.  But does the President still stand by his nomination?
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.
Q    Given where Gorsuch stands -- 
MR. SPICER:  That's number one?
Q    No, the second part of a two-part.  
MR. SPICER:  Oh.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Given where -- 
MR. SPICER:  I’m not calling on you anymore.  
Q    Given Judge Gorsuch’s position on the President’s attitude toward the judiciary, and given that the President has praised Neil Gorsuch for his intellect and for his integrity, does the President have any regrets about the comments that he’s made about federal judges?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President’s comments speak for -- no, he has no regrets.  But he’s very proud of the selection that he’s made, and he’s going to make a great associate justice to the Supreme Court.
Q    Now about the selection, but about the comments that he said, for example, about Judge --
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, I just -- he has no regrets.  Thank you.
Q    On immigration, Guadalupe Garcia de Rayos --
MR. SPICER:  Look what you started, April Ryan.
Q    Why are you calling me out?  I didn’t do anything.  (Laughter.)  
Q    I know the White House, I'm sure, has been following the situation of Guadalupe Garcia de Rayos.  And so I want to know, does the President believe she should have been deported?  And what message does he have to others in her position?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I’m going to refer you back to ICE on that.  That’s an ICE matter. 
Q    The President has no comment?
MR. SPICER:  The issue is developing in Arizona right now, and I would refer you back to ICE.
Margaret. 
Q    She’s in Mexico right now, though.
MR. SPICER:  I’d refer you back to ICE.
Q    Sean, in that lunch meeting, the President said that -- he basically said Senator Blumenthal’s comments were taken out of context, and that --
MR. SPICER:  Well, no, Judge Gorsuch’s comments were -- yeah.
Q    Judge Gorsuch, right.  And that his relaying of Judge Gorsuch’s comments were taken out of context.  However, Senator Ayotte, who is working with the White House to help shepherd Judge Gorsuch through the Hill, released a statement confirming those same remarks, “disheartening” and “demoralizing.”  
MR. SPICER:  Right, so here’s what --
Q    Is the President aware of that?  Because she was in that meeting.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, of course he’s aware.  This is what Senator Ayotte said:  "Judge Gorsuch has made it very clear in all of his discussions with senators, including Senator Blumenthal, that he could not comment on [any] specific cases, and that judicial ethics prevent him from commenting on political matters.  He has also emphasized the importance of an independent judiciary, and while he made clear that he was not referencing* [referring to] any specific case, he said that he finds any criticism of a judge’s integrity and independence disheartening and demoralizing.”
So there is a big difference between commenting on the specific comments that had been made in the tweet and his general philosophy about the judiciary and his respect for his fellow judges.  And I think the senator’s comments were very clear about how those are two distinct issues.
Q    Right.  And the judge’s comments as relayed through others were also in that context of the President’s attacks on the judiciary, which is what the senator you just read out was also talking about there. 
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    Was the President aware of that?  Because Senator Ayotte was sitting right across from him when he said that those comments were inaccurately reported or conveyed.
MR. SPICER:  No, the way that Senator Blumenthal characterized them, he was talking about the tweets and saying that he was disheartened.  That’s not what the judge said.  He was making two very complete, distinct arguments about how he views the comments that he should not be commenting on a political matter or on specific things.
But as a whole, he doesn’t like attacks in general on the judiciary.  It was a very distinct argument that he was making.  And I think that that’s where I think we’ve got to be clear, and that’s what Senator Ayotte was saying this morning.  Very, very different.  
Cecilia.  
Q    Is he to take that on board?  I mean -- 
MR. SPICER:  Is he what?
Q    Is he taking that on board?  I mean, you just said he doesn’t regret his past attacks on the judiciary.  
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    But now you have these confirmed remarks, which you were saying were exactly what the judge was talking about.
MR. SPICER:  No, no -- 
Q    And that’s not changing the President’s own --
MR. SPICER:  But hold on -- but, again, I think it’s important to understand that the judge was very clear that he was not commenting on any specific matter, right?  And then the he was asked about his general philosophy.  So you can’t then take that -- equate it back to the specific.  He literally went out of his way to say, I’m not commenting on a specific instance.  So to take what he said about a generalization and apply it to a specific is exactly what he was intending not to do.
Q    In other words, the President will continue to speak like this.
MR. SPICER:  Of course he will.  The President is going to speak his mind.  It goes back to Thomas Jefferson, that Presidents have commented on judicial nominees.  I mean, the idea of one branch talking about or commenting on another branch is as old as our republic.  
So I don’t know why -- and I find it interesting when President Obama criticized the Supreme Court for its Citizens United comments in the State of the Union, there wasn’t a similar concern about that.  The idea that this is --
Q    Well, I guess the "so-called judge" portion of it, the personal attack.
MR. SPICER:  But at some point it seems like there is clearly a double standard when it’s -- how this is applied.  When President Obama did it, there was no concern from this briefing room.  When he does it, it’s a ton of outrage.
So I just -- with all due respect, I think the President has made very clear that he was concerned about how that executive order in particular, which is what we’re talking about, was applied.  And I think we’ve addressed it from this briefing room over and over and over again that the U.S. code gives the President very clear authority to make this happen.
Cecilia.
Q    I want to make sure I understand what you’re saying.  Are you saying that “demoralizing” and “disheartening” was not specifically about the President’s comments and what he said?  And if so, how does the President know that?  Has he spoken to the Judge?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think the Judge literally made it very clear in his comments.
Q    But three senators have come out and said that they corroborate that statement, and said that -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  Senator Ayotte, who was there, made it very clear that he was commenting in general about attacks on the judiciary.  That was it.  Plain and simple.
Q    But three other senators have said, and the spokesman and for the Judge, on the record.   
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, Cecilia.  I can tell you that Senator Ayotte, who has been with him on every single thing, was very clear about that.  There’s no -- so I understand that.  And that is -- she has made it very clear over and over again.
Yes.
Q    Sean, your answer about the context doesn't make sense when you think about what Senator Ben Sasse said today and this morning on TV.  He said that he asked Judge Gorsuch specifically about the President’s “so-called judge” tweet.  And in response -- 
MR. SPICER:  Phil, this is like the fourth time I’ve asked and answered.
Q    No, but this is a different context, Sean. 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  Phil, I have asked --
Q    This is directly about the President's tweet.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And I’ve said exactly what Senator Ayotte said about it.  I don't know how many times you guys --
Q    But her comment was only about Blumenthal.
MR. SPICER:  I understand, thank you. 
Q    Sean, I'm going to continue on this line, despite what was just happening there.  Why isn’t the White House, why isn’t the President concerned about the influence or the appearance of the influence on the independent judiciary? 
MR. SPICER:  Why isn’t he -- I mean, he is free to speak his mind.  Where has this outrage been for the last hundred years?  There has been -- 
Q    I'm not asking about the Obama administration or any previous administration, I’m talking about this President and this White House.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And the President has -- part of the reason the President got elected is because he speaks his mind.  He doesn't hold it back.  He’s authentic.  And he’s not going to sit back, I think, when he feels very passionately about something as much as the executive order.
He was doing it to make sure Americans were safe.  The order -- the U.S. code is crystal-clear on this.  I think I’ve read it for like three days in a row.  And it can't be any clearer how much authority it gives the President to do what he can to keep us safe.  He’s concerned that he’s doing what he can to keep this country safe, and there has been a lot of activity to stand in the way.  
So I’m not sure how many more times I can read the code to you.  But 8 U.S. Code, 1182 -- 
Q    Yes, but you and me talking about it is not how the judicial process works.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  You've asked the question now eight times.
Q    One more I’d like to ask you.  One more about a different set of comments.
MR. SPICER:  You've got -- hold on.  I understand.  
Thank you, go ahead.
Q    About a different set of comments that have been made, Sean, also from Kellyanne Conway earlier this week.
Q    Let him go.  Let him go.
Q    Earlier this week.  You say the -- this is in context of Nordstrom and not about what she was counseled about, but about something she said to CNN earlier this week, is that the President doesn't comment on everything.  And so I want to contrast the President’s repeated statements about Nordstrom with the lack of comments about some other things, including, for example, the attack on a Quebec mosque and other similar environments.  Why is the President -- when he chooses to -- 
MR. SPICER:  Do you -- hold on -- because you just brought that up.  I literally stand at this podium and opened a briefing a couple days ago about the President expressing his condolences.  I literally opened the briefing about it.  So for you to sit there and say -- 
Q    I was here.  
MR. SPICER:  I know.  So why are you asking why he didn't do it when I literally stood here and did it?
Q    The President’s statement --
MR. SPICER:  I don't understand what you're asking.
Q    Kellyanne’s comments were about that the President doesn't have time to tweet about everything. 
MR. SPICER:  Right. 
Q    He’s tweeting about this.
MR. SPICER:  Right. 
Q    He’s not tweeting about something else.
MR. SPICER:  I came out here and actually spoke about it and said the President spoke --
Q    I'm talking about the President’s time. 
MR. SPICER:  What are you -- you're equating me addressing the nation here and a tweet?  I don't -- that's the silliest thing I’ve ever heard.  
Q    I’m talking about an attack on Nordstrom on -- 
MR. SPICER:  Okay, I’m done.  This is silly.  Okay, next.  
Q    -- and an attack on people, and you're equating --
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  You've asked your question.  Thank you. 
Q    Does that not diminish the language that you're using?
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  Go ahead.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  One of the criticisms leveled at President Trump’s predecessor, President Obama, by Republicans was his excessive use of executive orders.  The President signed three more executive orders today.  Why isn’t that criticism applicable to President Trump in the same manner that President Obama --  
MR. SPICER:  I think when you look at the context of what they -- yes, what those executive orders did, and there’s things that are within the bounds of trying to protect this country and ordering police officers -- nothing that I think even Democrats would complain, with the exception of the one that we've had conversations on.  Most of them have been widely praised by both parties to keep this country safe, to get jobs creation back.  Most of them have widely applauded.  
I think the difference with what President Obama did was stretch the executive order to take actions that had largely been within the realm of Congress, and to do things that didn't allow for prior input.  The stuff that the President is doing is almost entirely highly applauded by both sides of the aisle and won tremendous praise.  There's a big difference in the context in which those two administrations operated.  
Q    One of the criticisms in addition to that was that President Obama in using those EOs was governing by executive fiat, he wasn’t working with Congress.  Does the President plan to use --
MR. SPICER:  Right.  But again, I think --
Q    -- Congress in a legislative manner?
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.  And I just mentioned both tax reform and repealing and replacing Obamacare -- immigration.  There are so many areas where the President -- he literally just -- we held up this briefing a little so that eight United States senators could walk out and talk about -- and again, that meeting, while it was focused on the judiciary, they talked about infrastructure.  They talked about other priorities that they have.  
He has shown a commitment to work across the aisle to bring folks in, to listen, to hear their thoughts, to get ideas on a legislative agenda that they can move together with.  So I think there is a big difference between the last administration that sort of shunned Congress’s role, and this administration where the President is actively seeking their input and ideas, and helping them craft an agenda to move the country forward.
Alexis.
Q    Can I follow up on the tax question?
MR. SPICER:  Sure.
Q    Because there are revenue elements of the Affordable Care Act, if it is repealed and replaced -- there has been discussion on the Hill about what would be the appropriate track to get that into tax legislation or how to treat the tax legislation.  If the President is interested in unveiling a tax package that is as comprehensive as you just described, would the revenue elements of the Affordable Care Act be on a separate track?  Or is he talking about folding them into one reconciliation package?
MR. SPICER:  So right now, as I mentioned at the outset, I think we're primarily looking at two reconciliation tracks -- one utilizing the 2017 budget.  So you could put your Obamacare repeal and replace in the 2017 reconciliation package, and then you could potentially do tax reform -- comprehensive tax reform in the 2018 budget.
But I also want to say -- just so we're clear, these aren't prescriptive.  I think we continue to work towards Congress on a range of options and ideas to accomplish both of those and other goals.  Those seem primarily the two most opportune ways to get this thing done.  But I wouldn’t want to rule in or anything out.
I think both Speaker Ryan and Leader McConnell are going to weigh in on what best vehicles can be utilized to make this thing happen.  So I don't want to be prescriptive.
Ben.
Q    You talked about the President’s tax reform plan in coming weeks.  Is that something he’s talked about with leaders in both houses of Congress?  And are they prepared for this?
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.  I mean, as I mentioned, he has met with -- just wrapped up a meeting with Republicans and Democratic senators.  But this is something that the legislative affairs team, as well as the President himself has engaged with members of Congress to talk about this both privately and in bigger groups.  But there is a very large conversation going on to achieve bipartisan support for a package of this nature.
Jonathan.
Q    Does the President believe that it’s possible to balance the budget without major entitlement reform?  Any sort of House --
MR. SPICER:  I think one of the things that the President has looked at is not just the cutting side, but the revenue stream.  One area in particular -- natural resources regulation and tax reform, how we can grow the economy and bring in additional revenues to the government on the revenue side.  So there is a balance to how the President is looking at bringing down the deficit.
And I think before I get -- he’s going to -- we’ll have a budget out in a few weeks.  I think that will answer a lot.  But again, when it comes to deficit reduction, which is something that he is very interested in, that is not a one-side-of-the-ledger option; that a lot of what he is trying to talk about in these meetings and with business executives is how we can expand the economy.  And that expanded economy, that job creation, those explorations of natural resources and additional new jobs also bring additional tax revenue in.  
So there's a way to do this.  If we start bringing businesses back, creating more things, creating more jobs, that creates a revenue stream that has a significant impact on the deficit -- on being able to drive down the deficit and balancing the budget. 
So I think it’s not something I want to get in too much detail now, but I will tell you that I think the President has been very, very keen on trying to make sure that we look at the revenue side as much as we're looking at the spending side.
When it comes to the spending side, again, you're looking at a whole-of-government approach at how we look at every department, every agency, every job, the spending -- or the hiring freeze being one of them.  How do we make sure that we're looking at are these positions necessary?  Are they duplicative?  Are we using taxpayer money in the best possible way?  
Those are the whole -- it isn’t a single -- like, look at those particular programs and try to figure out what we can do.  He’s looking at everything and figuring out if we can make it more effective and efficient.
Yes, Scott.
Q    Yes, Sean, Monday, the House Oversight Committee is going to mark up Congressman Chaffetz’s bill to strike down the District of Columbia's Death with Dignity Act, the assisted suicide law.  It could soon come to the White House.  Has the President articulated any thoughts on that or the other bills to strike down D.C.’s gun laws, marijuana, funding for federal -- for abortions in the District?  Any thoughts on all these things that are coming your way?
MR. SPICER:  As they come our way and they get passed by both houses and come this way, we will issue statements of administration policy.  At this time, they are not at that position.  
So thank you, guys, very much.  We’ll see you tomorrow with the Prime Minister.  Take care.
Q    On Mar-a-Lago --
Q    One question.
Q    Come back.
MR. SPICER:  Sorry, one quick one.  On Mar-a-Lago, someone asked about it yesterday, so a quick follow-up.  The President has offered as a gift to the Prime Minister, he will be his guest at Mar-a-Lago.  No one else will be staying there, as far as I know, from the Japanese delegation.  They will stay out in town with the rest of the staff.  But that is a gift that the President is extending to the Prime Minister.
Thank you, guys.
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 2/14/2017, #12
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:15 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon.  Happy Valentine's Day.  I can sense the love in the room.  (Laughter.)  
First off, last night, the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Asset Control -- OFAC -- labeled the Venezuelan Vice President as a specially designated narcotics trafficker under the Kingpin Act.  
Before I continue with the briefing and look forward to your questions, I want to turn it over for a short time to newly minted Secretary of the Treasury, Steven Mnuchin, to issue a brief statement on this and deliver a few questions.
Secretary Mnuchin.
SECRETARY MNUCHIN:  Pleasure to be here on my first busy day in office.  Yesterday, the Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Asset Control, known as OFAC, designated Venezuelan national Tareck El Aissami as a specially designated narcotics trafficker pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act for playing a significant role in international narcotics trafficking.  El Aissami's primary frontman, Venezuelan national Samark Lopez Bellow was also designated.
These designations follow a multi-year investigation into El Aissami's criminal activities.  And President Trump appreciates the hard work put into this case by the Department of Treasury, the Department of State, as well as the National Security Council and many people throughout law enforcement.
Following the signing of the executive order last week designing to break the back of criminal drug cartels, this action demonstrates the President's seriousness about fighting the scourge of drugs in the United States.  In addition, he wants to send a clear message to the people of Venezuela that America stands with them.  
And with that, I'm happy to take two or three questions specifically about this.
Q    Secretary Mnuchin, since sanctions are directly relevant, obviously, to the Treasury Department, which is an agency that you now oversee, can you talk a little bit about plans to sanction Russia and if you'll keep Obama-era sanctions against Russia?
SECRETARY MNUCHIN:  Our current sanctions programs are in place, and I would say sanctions are an important tool that we will continue to look at for various different countries.  But it's a very important program within the Treasury Department.
Q    And for Russia specifically?
SECRETARY MNUCHIN:  The existing policies are in place.
Q    Mr. Secretary, are you contemplating any additional sanctions against Iran?  And can you tell us what you think the bottom line will be at these particular sanctions you announced yesterday and are referring to today with the Venezuelan Vice President?  What's it going to mean?
SECRETARY MNUCHIN:  Well, first, let me just comment -- again, this is as a result of a very long effort -- 
Q    Did you (inaudible) the implication, by the way?
SECRETARY MNUCHIN:  Yes, this was underway.  This was a very long effort.  But the implication is quite significant.  We expect that there will be frozen tens of millions of dollars and, again, that sanctions are a very important way of us sending a message that we will not stand for illicit activities, whether they're drug trafficking or terrorism. 
Q    On Iran, sir?
Q    Secretary, including sanctions, what other tools are you looking at?
SECRETARY MNUCHIN:  I can't comment on all the tools, but, again, let me just reinforce that sanctions are a very important tool within the department and we will use them as appropriate. 
Q    What about freezing assets?
SECRETARY MNUCHIN:  In this case, we did freeze assets -- again, as I mentioned, tens of millions of dollars of assets.  And that will have a very big impact on this.
So I'll take one more question please.  Yes, in the back.
Q    During the campaign, the President had made comments about Janet Yellen and whether -- basically inferring that she was being too political and that she should be ashamed of herself.  Do the folks at the Treasury Department and within the administration feel confident with Mrs. Yellen at the helm and to be able to set monetary policy going forward?
SECRETARY MNUCHIN:  Well, let me just comment.  I'm really here today, again, to talk about the Venezuelan situation.  But let me just say that there is a tradition of the Secretary of Treasury having ongoing meetings with the head of the Federal Reserve, and I look forward to that now that I'm in office doing that and spending time with her.
Thank you very much, everybody.  It's a pleasure to be here on my first day.  
MR. SPICER:  All right, let's get back to the fun.  We've been reviewing -- and I want to address the events of last night, first and foremost.  We've been reviewing and evaluating this issue with respect to General Flynn on a daily basis for a few weeks, trying to ascertain the truth.  We got to a point not based on a legal issue, but based on a trust issue, where a level of trust between the President and General Flynn had eroded to the point where he felt he had to make a change.
The President was very concerned that General Flynn had misled the Vice President and others.  He was also very concerned in light of sensitive subjects dealt with by that position of national security advisors -- like China, North Korea and the Middle East -- that the President must have complete and unwavering trust for the person in that position.
The evolving and eroding level of trust as a result of this situation and a series of other questionable instances is what led the President to ask for General Flynn’s resignation.  Immediately after the Department of Justice notified the White House Counsel of the situation, the White House Counsel briefed the President and a small group of senior advisors.  The White House Counsel reviewed and determined that there is not a legal issue, but rather a trust issue.
During this process it’s important to note that the President did not have his Attorney General, Jeff Sessions, who he trusts immensely, approved by the Senate.  When the President heard the information as presented by White House Counsel, he instinctively thought that General Flynn did not do anything wrong, and the White House Counsel’s review corroborated that.
It is not ordinary* [unordinary] for an incoming National Security Advisor to speak with his counterparts about the issues of concern to them.  In fact, he spoke with over 30 of his counterparts throughout the transition.  As Charles Krauthammer said last night, it is “perfectly reasonable for him to do so.”  The issue here was that the President got to the point where General Flynn’s relationship -- misleading the Vice President and others, or the possibility that he had forgotten critical details of this important conversation had created a critical mass and an unsustainable situation.
That’s why the President decided to ask for his resignation, and he got it.  The irony of this entire situation is that the President has been incredibly tough on Russia.  He continues to raise the issue of Crimea, which the previous administration had allowed to be seized by Russia.  His Ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, stood before the U.N. Security Council on her first day and strongly denounced the Russian occupation of Crimea.  As Ambassador Haley said at the time, the “dire situation in Eastern Ukraine is one that demands clear and strong condemnation of Russian actions.”  
President Trump has made it very clear that he expects the Russian government to deescalate violence in the Ukraine and return Crimea.  At the same time, he fully expects to and wants to be able to get along with Russia, unlike previous administrations, so that we can solve many problems together facing the world, such as the threat of ISIS and terrorism.
The President is currently evaluating a group of very strong candidates that will be considered to fill the National Security Advisor position permanently, and is confident in the ability of General Kellogg, a decorated and distinguished veteran of the United States Army, until that person is ultimately chosen.
Before I get into the President’s schedule for today, a quick recap of the President’s activity over the last few days, since we haven’t had the honor of spending so much time together.
The President has been keeping a close eye on the Oroville Dam situation in California.  We’ve worked closely with Doug LaMalfa, who represents California’s First District, where the dam is located, and other state officials to help people who have been impacted.  The situation is a textbook example of why we need to pursue a major infrastructure package in Congress.  Dams, bridges, roads, and all ports around the county have fallen into disrepair.  In order to prevent the next disaster, we will pursue the President’s vision for an overhaul of our nation’s crumbling infrastructure.
We hope everyone remains safe as the evacuations continue, and we’ll be working alongside with FEMA and appropriate government entities to make sure that we are doing everything we can to attend to this matter.  
The President was honored also to welcome the Prime Minister of Japan last week from their first official meeting at the White House to their joint press conference at Mar-a-Lago -- excuse me, their joint press conference and their time together at Mar-a-Lago.  The President and the Prime Minister had a productive visit that reaffirmed their determination to further strengthen the U.S.-Japan alliance and economic relationship.
At Mar-a-Lago, the President was proud to stand behind Prime Minister Abe on Saturday to convey the United States’ unwavering support for our Japanese allies in the face of North Korea’s most recent missile launch.  On Sunday, the President met with now-Secretary of Treasury Mnuchin and Mr. Steve Wynn before returning to Washington.
Yesterday, the President had an incredibly productive set of meetings and discussions with Prime Minister Trudeau of Canada, focusing on our shared commitment to close cooperation in addressing both the challenges facing our two countries and the problems throughout the world.  Our countries share a profound economic interest with more than $2 billion in two-way trade flowing across our border every day.  
The President was pleased to launch the Canada-United States Council for the Advancement of Women Entrepreneurs and Business Leaders by holding a roundtable discussion here at the White House.  Together with Prime Minister Trudeau, his daughter Ivanka, the President discussed the unique challenges that women face in the workplace with an incredible group of successful and respected female business executives from both countries.  A full list of the participants is available through the pool.
In addition to his in-person meetings with the prime ministers of Japan and Canada, the President also recently had phone calls with the presidents of Tunisia, Peru, Nigeria, Colombia and South Africa.  Readouts are available on all of those calls.
Finally, following the Prime Minister's visit yesterday, the President met with Chairwoman McDaniel and Co-Chairman Paduchik of the Republican National Committee.  In the afternoon, the President participated in a pinning ceremony for Major Ricardo Turner, one of his military aides.  The aides to the President are mid-grade officers, one from of each of the services.  They provide direct support to the President in his role as Commander-in-Chief, and their primary responsibilities are to serve as an emergency action officer, aide-de-camp, and ceremonial aide.  It's a longstanding tradition that when the President's military aide is promoted to the next higher grade, the President conducts that promotion.  Major Ricardo Turner, the President's military aide, was recently promoted to Lieutenant Colonel, and the promotion was held in the Oval Office.
The President also spoke yesterday with Maureen Scalia on the one-year anniversary of her husband's passing.  The President and Mrs. Scalia discussed her late husband's incredible legacy, and how the President is making every effort to carry it on by nominating Judge Gorsuch, who shares the love of the Constitution, to succeed him on the bench.
Last night, the President obviously hosted the swearing-in of Secretary Mnuchin in the Oval Office.  Secretary Mnuchin is a world-class financier whose decades of experience with financial and monetary matters make him the ideal person to spearhead the President's plan to develop a dynamic, booming economy that works for all Americans.  We're glad to officially have him on board.
Now, moving on to the schedule for today -- this morning, the President and newly confirmed Secretary of Education DeVos held a parent-teacher conference meeting with parents and educators from public, private, charter, and home schools this morning.  The President opened the meeting by congratulating Secretary DeVos for her toughness and staying the course throughout her confirmation process.  He then discussed his vision for all Americans to have an opportunity to climb the ladder of success, starting with making quality education available to every child no matter their zip code.
Under the current system, the President believes too many of our children are trapped in failing schools, especially in the African American community.  The President told the group to begin addressing this problem, which he views as a civil rights issue.  He wants parents to be able to decide what educational options are best for their children.  The group launched into a wide-ranging discussion that included public and charter schools, home-schooling, dropout prevention, and the BASIS Schools Program, states' responsibilities, and the current state of the U.S. Department of Education.
The President's ultimate goal is to create safe communities, great schools, and well-paying jobs.  He believes that each of these goals is linked to the others, and the Trump administration is taking concrete steps to achieve them all.
The President also spoke on the phone earlier today with Prime Minister May of the United Kingdom, continuing the productive conversation they started during her visit earlier this year.  A readout on that call should be coming soon.  The President then had lunch with New Jersey Governor Chris Christie and his wife regarding combatting drug use.
At 2:00, the President will sign House Joint Resolution 41 in the Oval Office.  The resolution is a start of rolling back harmful Obama-era regulations, which have cost the American business consumers a staggering $890 billion, making our companies less competitive and even driving some of them out of business.  The American free enterprise system is the greatest engine for economic prosperity in the world, but for too many, to reach its maximum potential, we must remove the barriers to productivity that are holding back our great workers and businesses.  
Misguided federal regulations, such as the SEC rule addressed by HJR 41, inflict real cost on the American people and put our businesses, especially small businesses, at a significant disadvantage.  It's a priority for the Trump administration to fix our broken regulatory system so that it enhances American productivity and wellbeing without imposing unnecessary costs and burdens.  Signing this joint resolution is one more step towards achieving this goal. 
Later this evening, the President will meet with Secretary Kelly and Attorney General Sessions to continue discussions on potential options for addressing the very clear national security threats we're facing in light of the recent Supreme Court ruling.
Tomorrow, the President is pleased to be welcoming Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to the White House.  They will discuss ways to advance and strengthen the special relationship between our two countries and stability in the Middle East.  They will consult on a range of issues -- regional issues -- including addressing the threats posed by Iran and its proxies, the crisis in Syria, and countering ISIS and other terrorist groups.  
As the President has made clear, his administration will work to achieve comprehensive agreement that would end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict so that Israelis and Palestinians can live in peace and security.  The way forward toward that goal will also be discussed between the President and the Prime Minister.  They will hold a joint press conference tomorrow, as well, and further guidance will be coming on the time and location.  
Looking ahead to Friday, the President will travel to Charleston, South Carolina, to attend the rollout of the first Boeing 787-10 Dreamliner.  This visit will give the President an opportunity to celebrate a huge milestone for thousands of workers at Boeing, America’s number-one exporter and the millions of American workers involved in aerospace.  This trip has been months in the making, and we’re thrilled to celebrate the rollout of this amazing plane.
With that, I’d be glad to take some of your questions.  
Jonathan Karl.
Q    Back in January, the President said that nobody in his campaign had been in touch with the Russians.  Now, today, can you still say definitively that nobody on the Trump campaign, not even General Flynn, had any contact with the Russians before the election?
MR. SPICER:  My understanding is that what General Flynn has now expressed is that during the transition period -- well, we were very clear that during the transition period, he did speak with the ambassador -- 
Q    I’m talking about during the campaign.
MR. SPICER:  I don’t have any -- there’s nothing that would conclude me -- that anything different has changed with respect to that time period.
Q    And why would the President -- if he was notified 17 days ago that Flynn had misled the Vice President, other officials here, and that he was a potential threat to blackmail by the Russians, why would he be kept on for almost three weeks?
MR. SPICER:  Well, that’s not -- that assumes a lot of things that are not true.  The President was informed of this.  He asked the White House Counsel to review the situation.  The first matter was whether there was a legal issue.  We had to review whether there was a legal issue, which the White House Counsel concluded there was not, as I stated in my comments.  This was an act of trust.  Whether or not he actually misled the Vice President was the issue, and that was ultimately what led to the President asking for and accepting the resignation of General Flynn.  That’s it, pure and simple.  It was a matter of trust.  
We went through a very deliberative process, a very thorough review.  The first part of it was clearly to understand the legal aspect of this, and that was simply concluded there was no legal aspect.  And then what happened is the President evaluated the trust aspect of it.
Major.
Q    When the President was asked on Air Force One yesterday -- I mean, on Friday, rather, traveling down to Mar-a-Lago, about reports about conversations with the Russians about sanctions, he said, “I don’t know about it.  I’ll look into that.”  Was he being truthful?  
MR. SPICER:  What he was asked specifically is was he aware of a Washington Post story.  He hadn’t seen that at the time.  Of course, he was involved; I just said that he was aware of the situation right after the White House Counsel informed him back in January.
Q    And his inquiry to the White House Counsel was strictly about the legalities involved, not the propriety of the conversations between General Flynn and the Russian ambassador?  
MR. SPICER:  Well, initially, just to be -- 
Q    Do you have any criticism of the merits of those conversations about sanctions before the Trump administration had been inaugurated?
MR. SPICER:  So just to be clear, the acting Attorney General informed the White House Counsel that they wanted to give a “heads up” to us on some comments that may have seemed in conflict with what he had sent the Vice President out in particular.  The White House Counsel informed the President immediately.  The President asked him to conduct a review of whether there was a legal situation there.  That was immediately determined that there wasn’t.  That was what the President believed at the time, from what he had been told, and he was proved to be correct.
The issue, pure and simple, came down to a matter of trust.  And the President concluded that he no longer had the trust of his national security advisor over --
Q    But was it proper for the incoming national security advisor, not part of an administration, to be discussing an issue as sensitive as sanctions with the Russian ambassador?
MR. SPICER:  His job is to discuss issues with his counterparts.  I mean, Charles Krauthammer put it perfectly last night -- that’s what he’s supposed to be doing.  I mean, that’s his job.  We would constantly read out throughout the transition who he was speaking to, how he was getting ready.  The President was receiving congratulatory calls from around the world.  We would read out the world leader calls.  
The job of the incoming NSA is to sit down with the counterparts and start that dialogue, and that’s exactly what he did.  So the question wasn’t did he do anything improper or legal, it’s a question of could he be trusted further.  And that trust, or the erosion of that trust, was, frankly, the issue.
Q    Did the President instruct him to talk about sanctions with the Russian ambassador?
MR. SPICER:  No, absolutely not.  No, no, no.  But that -- no.  And there’s no -- that’s never --
Q    So would he have preferred he had not done that?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I think the President had no problem with the fact that he acted in accord with what his job was supposed to be doing.  He had an ability to talk about issues that were important, whether it was that or the 30 other countries that he spoke to.  That was part of his job, as has been noted by many people.  That’s what the national security advisor and, frankly, other positions do -- they begin the process of preparing their incoming job by talking to counterparts, people who have previously held the job, et cetera.  If he had not done that, there would be questions as to whether he’s properly prepared on day one.  
Q    So he (inaudible) one conversation about sanctions.
MR. SPICER:  No, the issue isn’t whether or not -- what he discussed.  There’s been a complete legal review of that, and there’s no issue with that.  The issue is whether or not he failed to properly inform the Vice President -- or not be honest with him, or not remember it. 
But that’s the plain and simple issue.  And when he lost trust with the President, that’s when the President asked for and received his resignation.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  Yesterday, Kellyanne Conway, counselor to the President, said that the President continued to have trust in General Flynn.  
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    What happened between yesterday morning and yesterday evening that led the President to lose confidence in General Flynn?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I’m not going to get into the specifics of what the President’s thinking was, but I will just say, as I noted in the opening statement, that it was an evolving and eroding process.  
And so at the end of the day, the President made a decision, as he does on all subjects, and asked for and received the national security advisor’s -- but he is one of those people that we’ve noted before -- when he is ready to make a decision, he makes it, whether it’s hiring somebody or asking for someone’s resignation.  Once he has determined that he’s made a decision on any subject, that’s when he informs his staff.
So going into the day, it was an evolving situation.  He made a determination late in the day, and he executed on it.
Yes, Alexis.
Q    He’s an extremely loyal person, General Flynn.  Was it a difficult decision for the President to let General Flynn go?
MR. SPICER:  Well, sure.  I mean, General Flynn is a dedicated public servant.  He’s headed the DIA, he has been an outstanding member of the Army, both as an officer and then as a flag officer.  He’s served this country admirably.  And I think the President appreciated his service to his nation, his commitment to his campaign, and his service to this country so far.
But at some point, the decision came down on whether or not that that trust had eroded.  The important matters, as I mentioned, that are before the President when he’s dealing with issues of world matters, of all of the issues -- friends and allies, foes, hot spots -- he needs to rely on a national security advisor to give him sage advice.  And I think at a certain point, that guidance, that trust, eroded.  And the President, as he does on all matters, ultimately decides that when he's ready to make a decision, he executes.
Alexis.
Q    Sean, two questions.  Does the President believe that anything that he discussed with General Flynn during the transition might have been construed by the General as a request or an encouragement to discuss sanctions with the Russian ambassador?  That's question number one.
MR. SPICER:  So -- oh, we're going to pause.  So, on the first, again, as I made clear, there's nothing that the General did that was a violation of any sort.  He was well within his duties to discuss issues of common concern between the two countries.  I will say it again:  What this came down to is a matter of trust.  The President was glad that he was out there conducting his job, preparing for his job, going back and forth with his counterparts throughout the world, much as the President had done with all of these world leaders calling the President, congratulating him, looking to set up calls for him once he was inaugurated.  
Similarly, General Flynn was beginning that process with his counterparts throughout the world.  That was never of a concern to the President, from day one that he was briefed from the White House Counsel.  The issue, plain and simple, came down to a matter of trust.  And once that occurred, it was over.
Q    On question number one, just to clarify, the President does not believe that any discussion that might have taken place -- and we know from intel, it did, on sanctions -- creates a problem for the President in any way -- that that is not a problem, that General Flynn discussed sanctions with the Russians?
MR. SPICER:  No, there is -- I can't say it clearly enough.  There was nothing in what General Flynn did, in terms of conducting himself, that was an issue.  What it came down to, plain and simple, was him misleading the Vice President and others, and not having a firm grasp on his recollection of that.  That's it.
Q    Question number two.  Lawmakers on Capitol Hill from both sides of the aisle would like to investigate or probe or ask more questions about this.  Does the President hope to cooperate with those investigations?  Would he instruct members of his staff who worked for him here and in the administration to cooperate with those investigations?
MR. SPICER:  Well, we're going to comply with the law.  I think the President feels very confident the review that was conducted by White House Counsel was very thorough and concluded very conclusively, as he had first come to -- instinctively come to the conclusion that there was nothing wrong.  So people are free to do what they wish, but I think that they will find exactly what the President first believed and what the White House Counsel concluded.  And, frankly, I believe a couple publications even reported that there was no investigation for a reason -- because there was not an issue of law, it was an issue of trust.
George.
Q    When do you expect to have a replacement in place?  And secondly, on another topic, there was a report yesterday that one of your colleagues said the White House is keeping dossiers on reporters.  Can you say if that's true or not?
MR. SPICER:  That is absolutely not true.  There are no dossiers being kept.  It's just a binder that I put right here, that's about it.  That was a joke.  Hold on one second.  And then, I'm sorry, George, the first part?
Q    Timetable on a replacement.
MR. SPICER:  Just like the way he handled this situation, the President will meet with individuals, and when he's ready to make a decision and he feels as though the person is qualified and can properly advise him on the issue, he'll make that decision.  But that, as all decisions, rests with him.
I'm just going to go to my first Skype seat.  John Huck of WKVVU out of Las Vegas.
John.
Q    Thank you so much on behalf of our viewers here in Southern Nevada for the opportunity to join you today.  As you know, Sean, Las Vegas has suffered terribly in the last recession -- more so than perhaps any other city in the country.  As the administration moves forward with repealing financial regulations and possibly rolling back Dodd-Frank, what guarantees can you make to Nevadans that those actions won't lead banks and investments banks to re-engage with the risky financial behaviors that tanked our economy the last time and left taxpayers here on the hook to bail those banks out?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, John.  I think one of the things -- if you look at the intent of Dodd-Frank, it was to make sure that we didn't have institutions that were too big to fail.  And frankly, it has actually created institutions that are now too big to fail.  Dodd-Frank actually did exactly the opposite of what it intended to do.  And I think when you look at the regulation HJR 41 that the President is signing today, this is another example of the President taking decisive action to roll back regulations that are, frankly, creating more of a burden on our nation's banks and businesses than helping them.
I think the President is going to be very clear with making sure that we do things that build up the goal of what Dodd-Frank actually intended to do.  But right now, we actually, through Dodd-Frank, put taxpayers more on the hook than we let them off.  We've created more institutions and created more guarantees for the federal government to bail out some of these institutions if they exceed their authority.
John Roberts.
Q    Let me go back to what you said at the beginning.  You said the White House Counsel's Office reviewed this and determined that there was nothing illegal.  What evidence did they look at in making this determination?  And secondly, Democrats up on the Hill say that they want an investigation of this.  They're looking into what did the President know and when did he know it.  So can you tell us what evidence you looked at the White House Counsel's Office, and what did the President know about all of this and when was he aware of it?
MR. SPICER:  Well, as I mentioned, the first day that the Department of Justice made White House Counsel available -- or sought to notify White House Counsel was January 26th.  The President was immediately informed of the situation.  As I said, based on the information that was provided at the time, the view was that this was not a violation.  He was proved instinctively correct.  And White House Counsel at that time undertook an extensive review both of materials and questioning --
Q    Did they --
MR. SPICER:  I'm not going to get into the specifics.  What I will tell you is, on multiple occasions they had an exhaustive and extensive questioning of General Flynn on several occasions based on information that was provided to them, or materials that were provided to them to review.  I'm not going to get into the details of that, but I will just say that there was an exhaustive review.  
And again, the thing that's important to note is the Vice President and myself -- in fact, I think the first time I brought this issue up was January 13 -- the Department of Justice didn’t notify the White House or the White House Counsel at that time in the transition phase until 13 days later.  
So I think it's important to understand something very, very important:  This idea of why did it take so long -- I think the first question should be, where was the Department of Justice in this.  They were aware of this.  We were making statements based on what General Flynn was telling us, starting on January 13th.  The Vice President went out on the 15th, right?  They didn’t notify the White House Counsel's Office until January 26th.  At that time, there was an immediate -- the President was immediately informed of that and then asked the White House Counsel to conduct a very, very thorough review.  The first part of that review was focused on whether or not there was any legal issue -- that's it.  Once that became the issue, then there was a -- it shifted into phase two, which is whether or not there was trust still maintained.  Then that became a separate set of issues that were --
Q   I understand.  I'm speaking to the actual evidence, that the FBI has transcripts of these intercepts, which I assume were done by the NSA via a FISA Court order.  Was there any communication between the White House Counsel's Office and the FBI?  Did those transcripts ever enter --
MR. SPICER:  I will say that obviously -- there was obviously communication between the Department of Justice and the White House Counsel's Office.  I'm not going to get into the specific nature of that.  I think it would be inappropriate because of the nature of the information that was being discussed.
Yes.
Q    Why not dismiss the General on January 27th?  Why, if the question was of trust, and immediately you have on the 15th, he's on "Face the Nation" saying that -- the Vice President on "Face the Nation" saying that this is what General Flynn told me, and then January 26th you hear the opposite -- why not immediately act?  Why wait another two and a half weeks?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t understand how that's a due process.  Because what the -- the Attorney General didn’t come -- the Acting Attorney General -- come in and say that there was an issue.  She said, we wanted to give you a head's up that there may be information, okay?  She could not confirm there was an investigation.  And so it would be unbelievably short-sighted and wrong to go in and dismiss someone immediately.  In fact, what the President did was take decisive action to make sure that the White House Counsel thoroughly reviewed and vetted the situation.  He took immediate, decisive action.  And if you look at the timeline in terms of what he did and how that expanded, the White House Counsel's first and foremost goal was to make sure that there was not a legal issue at hand.  Once that was concluded, then it became a phase of determining whether or not the General's action on this and a whole host of other issues undermined his trust in the President.  But the President, from day one, from minute one, was unbelievably decisive in asking for and demanding that his White House Counsel and their team review the situation, first and foremost, to question whether it's a legal issue.  And what they immediately determined -- not immediately, but within several days, was that, after review, that there was not a legal issue, and then it moved into a second phase.
Mara.
Q    So wait -- because the President tweeted this morning that the real story is leaks -- illegal leaks.
MR. SPICER:  It is leaks.  But if you think about this -- understand that all of this information was leaked.  I mean, I got to -- and again, I know we've got me lecturing you about what the story should be, but I think that there's a real story here.  The idea that not just in this administration, but the Obama administration going back to the Bush administration and back, that we have an issue where classified information, of which this would be, is handled in such a way that it is being given out.  
And I know in some cases it's a good story, and I understand that, and that's to some degree your responsibility to write that.  But I think there's also a story here, with the amount of leaks that are coming out of people that are entrusted with national security secrets and classified information are leaking it out.  That's a real concern for this President; that when he's talking on the phone with a world leader, that when he's making key decisions that are in the interest of protecting this country, that we have to wonder whether or not people who work for our government, who are entrusted with classified information and decision-based materials are leaking that information out.  That, I do believe, is a big story that should be reported.  I also believe that the President is, rightly so, very, very concerned about this, because it's not just something that is plaguing the current situation, but it goes back through the Obama administration, the Bush administration, the Clinton administration.  When we have government employees that are entrusted with this and then leak it out, that undermines our national security, frankly.
Trey.
Q    Hold on --
MR. SPICER:  Sorry, I apologize, Mara.
Q    I know you just forgot.  I have a question, but I want you to clarify something you just said to John.  Are you saying that no one has read the transcripts of the calls, or you just don’t want to tell us whether they -- 
MR. SPICER:  I said that I'm not going to comment on it.
Q    Okay.  So my question is about sanctions.  You were very specific in talking about the sanctions against Crimea and that he doesn’t want to lift them until Crimea is returned.  But the sanctions that Flynn was discussing were the sanctions for the election hacking.
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    That's something the President could remove on his own if he wanted to.  Is he committed to keeping those?
MR. SPICER:  I think Secretary Mnuchin commented on that.  There's no change in our current sanctions strategy with Russia, and I've got nothing for you on that.
Trey.
Q    Given that the current story is leaks, what is the President willing to do to investigate further to determine where these leaks are coming from?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, again, I think this goes back to the same way he negotiates.  Telling people what we’re going to do to cover up additional leaks wouldn’t be a very sound strategy when it comes to making sure that that doesn’t happen again.  The President has been very clear, whether he’s negotiating or dealing with an issue like this, you don’t telegraph to people how you’re going to handle it.
Q    Sean --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, Trey gets a follow-up.  Everyone else got one.
Q    So he is going to take some sort of steps to investigate these leaks that the administration --
MR. SPICER:  I would just say that the President, as I said, is clearly upset about this.  He understands the threat that they pose to our national security, and he’s going to make sure that he continues to take action to make sure that that stops.
Yes.
Q    Thank you.  So you’ve mentioned time and time again that this is an issue of trust.  You also said that it was an evolving issue, and that the issue of the trust that the President had for Flynn came down to this deception that happened with the Vice President but also a host of whole other -- of other issues.  What were the other issues?  And was the Vice President the only person that was misled by Flynn?  Were other people misled?
MR. SPICER:  I mean, I think I've stood before you before and explained what General Flynn had conveyed to me.  I think there were some others that he had similarly expressed that to, as well.  So that’s why it’s others, because it wasn’t just people who went out and made public pronouncements and a series of questioning that was rather exhaustive over a long period of time.  He continued to maintain that that had not occurred, and I think that’s where the President continued to -- and that’s why the President was very clear that it was an eroding issue.  Because it was after a series of issues and a series of statements and pronouncements that the President came to that conclusion.
Q    Were there other issues outside of this call and the deception over that that led to the mistrust with Flynn?
MR. SPICER:  I think the statement is very clear that it was this and a series of issues.  
With that, let me go to Jason Stevens of the Federalist Paper in Ashland, Ohio.
Q    Thank you.  What our readers at the Federalist Papers Project are most interested in is returning the country to the first principles of republican government as understood by the American Founders.  One of those principles, in the Declaration of Independence, is the consent of the governed.  So my question is this:  What are the President’s future plans for rolling back the expensive and burdensome regulations of the administrative state, most of which are the product of unelected, unaccountable bureaucrats who never received the consent of the governed to do anything, let alone make law?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Jason.  I think, as I mentioned today, the President, in just a few minutes, is going to be signing HJR 41, which is one of those attempts to roll back some onerous Dodd-Frank regulations with respect to the SEC in particular.  
He is going to continue -- last week we rolled out another one of those executive orders that ensures that for every new regulation, two must be gotten rid of.  The President’s commitment to rolling back regulation and the overreach of government, I think, is unwavering and unquestionable.  So you’re going to continue to see this President undo a lot of that government overreach.
Jim.
Q    Yeah, just a quick question.  You said earlier in your comments that the President has been incredibly tough on Russia.  How is that possible?  He has made comment after comment over the course of the campaign, the transition, where he defended Vladimir Putin.  He had an interview with Bill O’Reilly where he, when he was asked if Vladimir Putin is a killer, he said, well, America hasn’t been that much better in this regard also.  
To me it seems, and I think to a lot of Americans it seems that this President has not been tough on Russia.  How can you say that?
MR. SPICER:  Because I just walked through it.  I think there’s a difference between the President wanting to have an understanding of how a good relationship with Russia can help us defeat ISIS and terrorism throughout the world.  
Look, the Obama administration tried to have a reset with Russia.  They failed.  They tried to tell Russia not to invade Crimea.  They failed.  This President understands that it’s in America’s national and economic interests to have a healthy relationship.  If he has a great relationship with Putin in Russia, great.  If he doesn’t, then he’ll continue on.  But he’s not going to just assume that because it wasn’t able to happen in the past -- I think you’ve seen, with Prime Minister Abe in particular and others, that the reset that Prime Minister Netanyahu talked about tomorrow -- so many of these countries from around the globe are looking forward to resetting the relationships that this country has with them; that they feel as though they were abandoned over the last eight years, and that they are excited about the prospect of a new U.S. relationship under a Trump administration.
But with respect to Russia, I think the comments that Ambassador Haley made at the U.N. were extremely forceful and very clear that until --
Q    That was an announcement from Haley, not the President.
MR. SPICER:  She speaks for the President.  I speak for the President.  All of us in this administration.  And so all of the actions and all of the words in this administration are on behalf and at the direction of this President.  So I don’t think we could be any clearer on the President’s commitment.
Katie Pavlich.
Q    Quick little follow-up, because I haven’t had any follow-ups or questions in a while.  But anyway --
MR. SPICER:  Really?
Q    No -- the other question is, just getting back to what was asked a few moments ago about trust and being misled.  Are you saying that the national security advisor was intentionally misleading the President, the Vice President, yourself when he made these comments to you about that conversation?
MR. SPICER:  No, look, the trust is given by the President.  It’s a relationship between he and any individual.  And so, as I mentioned in the comments, maybe it was because -- I don't know that it was intentional, he may have just forgotten, but I think at some point trust isn’t just -- 
Q    Isn't that kind of a weird thing to forget, though, in a conversation where you talk about -- 
MR. SPICER:  But that’s the point, Jim, is that at some point that trust eroded to a point where the President did not feel comfortable with him serving in that position, and asked for and received his resignation.
Katie Pavlich. 
Q    Sean, on the trust issue and the eroding of trust, last night, in General Flynn’s resignation letter, he said he inadvertently briefed the Vice President-elect and others with incomplete information.
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    Considering his role in advising the President on national security matters, is the White House concerned that he maybe briefed the President-elect, Vice President-elect with incomplete information on other matters of national security in addition to his phone calls with the Russian ambassador?
MR. SPICER:  Well, when you look at the team, it’s not one person in isolation, Katie.  It’s several.  You’ve got General Kelly on the homeland security front, General Mattis on the DOD front -- he’s got an entire national security staff and apparatus that briefs him -- you know, Director Pompeo at the CIA, and others from the DNI’s office that come in and brief him on a whole host of issues.  So it’s not a single position.
Q    So was his situation an isolated incident of giving incomplete --
MR. SPICER:  Well, yeah.  Regardless of whether it’s a single situation, it’s not as though there’s one person briefing him.  And the President synthesizes a lot of information, both written and stuff that is briefed to him, and ultimately it is he who makes that decision based a lot on what he already knows, what he is presented with.  So the President gets information from a lot of people -- generals, admirals, people in the military community, ambassadors, people in the State Department, an exhaustive team at the National Security Council, and then makes an ultimate decision based on that and what he already knows to be the case.
Q    Sean, you’ve been asked a couple times about these transcripts of calls.  Will the White House declassify those and release them?
MR. SPICER:  Looks, it is inappropriate for me to comment on those at this time.  Right now, the focus is on some of the evolving issues that were going around the globe, as you know.
Q    Will you be open to it?
MR. SPICER:  Let me answer the question.  It is not an issue that has come up.  I think the President right now is focused on replacing his national security advisor, making sure that he’s presented with the best possible information to make these key decisions.
But at this time, we also have got to be careful that we were not involving ourselves in a matter of national security.  And the review, as I mentioned, was done and then immediately last night when the President felt as though it was time for a decision, made it.  That’s where we are in this iteration of the process.  If we have anything further for you, we will update you.
I want to go to Joyce Kaufman of WFTL Talk News in Palm Beach, Florida.
Q    Thank you so much for this opportunity.  I’m approximately six miles away from Mar-a-Lago right now, and the President met with Prime Minister Abe from Japan at Mar-a-Lago this weekend.  And besides giving us traffic and security nightmares, there were apparently conversations that took place by telephone and with the Prime Minister that were in a relatively insecure dining area.  There is already video of this surfacing.  Will there be a SCIF put in place in these dining areas, these public places?  And one last question.  When he meets with Prime Minister Netanyahu tomorrow, will they be discussing moving the embassy, and settlements?
MR. SPICER:  On the second one, I’m not going to get ahead of the Prime Minister’s discussion with the President.  We’ll have a readout.  After that, there will be a press conference.
With respect to the first, there is a SCIF at Mar-a-Lago.  And just to be clear, the briefing -- the President was briefed in a SCIF ahead of dinner.  He went with his national security team.  They briefed him on the situation in North Korea.  Subsequently, he had a dinner, of which was attended exclusively by U.S. and Japanese delegation members.  At that time, apparently there was a photo taken, which everyone jumped to nefarious conclusions about what may or may not be discussed.  There was simply a discussion about press logistics, where to host the event.  And then after the dinner, the President went back into the SCIF to get a further update from his team.
So I’m not really sure where people jumped to conclusions.  There is a SCIF there.  It was utilized on two occasions that evening to convey to the President by his national security team the situation in North Korea.  And then the President subsequently stood shoulder to shoulder with the Japanese President to make sure that our commitment to their security and stand against North Korea was fully made aware.
Margaret.
Q    Sean, can you just clarify, because I got a little turned around -- did President Trump, or President-elect Trump at the time, know of General Flynn’s discussion of the sanctions while he was NSC-designate?  And if not, when did he finally learn about them?  And if so, why was he okay with that?
MR. SPICER:  So, no, he was not aware, as he’s not back-briefed on every conversation that his national security team has or other staffers.  They were performing their duties, as other people were in terms of getting up to speed, conveying with counterparts and previous members of their team.  
That being said, when he was made aware of it, once the White House Counsel briefed him on concerns the Department of Justice had -- and at that point, as I mentioned, what he asked and what he believed at the time and was confirmed by White House Counsel was that there was no legal issue here.  Discussing the issue didn’t violate anything; it was appropriate in the normal course of action to discuss that.  And he immediately asked the White House Counsel to further confirm what his instincts were at the time.
Thank you, guys.  Have a great one.  We’ve got everybody for a bill signing.  We’ve got a bill signing. 
Q    I didn’t get my --
MR. SPICER:  Oh, he’s got -- Margaret gets a follow-up, but he’s got --
Q    Are you -- is the administration undertaking any sort of effort, either Cabinet-wide or, like, inside the shop to make sure that everyone comes forward who had any communications with the Russians about sanctions or otherwise?
MR. SPICER:  There’s no other information.  I mean, as far as we are aware, that is an isolated incident that occurred.  And again, the key point in this isn’t that there were discussions.  There was nothing wrong or inappropriate about those discussions.  It purely came down to a matter of trust.  That’s it.
Thank you, guys.  See you tomorrow.  Happy Valentine’s Day. 
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 2/21/2017, #13
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
1:42 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Hey, good afternoon, everyone.  It's been a little while.  Hope you missed me.  (Laughter.)  
Q    You missed us?
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.  We’ve got a lot to talk about today, so let’s get right to it.
First off, I want to acknowledge the tragic plane crash that occurred in Australia that took the lives of five individuals, including four Americans.  The President’s thoughts and prayers are with the families of the victims, and the U.S. embassy and consulate are ready to provide necessary and appropriate assistance.
Moving on, the President was honored to announce that Lieutenant General McMaster will be his National Security Advisor.  General McMaster served this nation in the United States Army for over three decades, including during Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation Enduring Freedom, and Desert Storm.
The President met with many distinguished and qualified candidates for the position, and as he has said that he will continue to consider many of them for other positions within the administration.  He is especially pleased that Lieutenant General Kellogg will stay on as the National Security Council Chief of Staff.
The President is proud to welcome General McMaster to the team where he will have full authority to structure the office to his desires to best serve its ultimate mission, which is to protect the American interests at home and abroad.
This morning, Secretary Kelly and the Department of Homeland Security released memos regarding the implementation of two of the President’s executive orders that are designed to protect the homeland.  These two memos provide explicit guidance to DHS staff on how to carry out two executive orders signed by the President on January 25th -- one dealing with interior enforcement and one dealing with border security.  Perhaps most critically, the President is empowering DHS to carry out the immigration laws currently on the books.  
Of course, DHS gave a full briefing on these memos this morning, but just to briefly summarize a few of the facts:  The memo regarding the executive order “Enhancing Public Safety in the Interior of the United States” outlines several practices and policies in order to strengthen the efficient and faithful execution of this country’s immigration laws.  That includes hiring more ICE agents and officers, as well as additional mission support and legal staff necessary to support their activities.  This memo also directs the establishment of the Victims of Immigration Crime Engagement Office within ICE, fulfilling another major campaign promise of the President.  This office will facilitate the engagement with victims and their families to ensure that their questions and concerns regarding immigration enforcement efforts are addressed. 
The memo regarding the executive order “Border Security and Immigration Enforcement Improvements” outlines the steps that DHS will take to secure the nation’s southern border, prevent further illegal immigration, and to repatriate illegal immigrants swiftly, consistently, and humanely.  This includes immediately identifying and allocating all sources of available funding for the planning, design, construction, and maintenance of a wall along our southern border and hiring of additional personnel, including 5,000 additional CBP border agents. 
Again, I would refer you to DHS for further comment on these specific memos.  There are factsheets and Q&As on the DHS website that address many of the intricacies in areas within each of these executive orders that you might have questions on.
Also, this weekend, the President had calls with the President of Panama and the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago.  Readouts of those calls have both been provided.
The President’s team this weekend also had a very productive meeting on the President’s plan to repeal and replace Obamacare, and ensure that it is replaced with a system that works for all Americans.
Back to the President’s schedule today, in honor of Black History Month, the President started his day by visiting the National Museum of African American History and Culture.  The museum opened last September and has quickly become one of Washington’s most-visited attractions.
The President was joined by a group of individuals that included his daughter, Ivanka; Dr. Ben Carson and his wife; Senator Tim Scott;
Alveda King, the niece of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.; museum director Lonnie Bunch; Dr. David Skorton, who is the Secretary of the Smithsonian, as well as others.
The President commented several times during his tour about how impressed he was with the museum.  Some of the exhibits that he was particularly drawn to included the section on Harriet Tubman, which featured a shawl that was given to her by Queen Victoria in the late 1800s; the section of the museum that featured the courageous contribution of African Americans that have made to the United States military.  And the President was particularly pleased by the Muhammad Ali exhibit with the quote, “I shook up the world” prominently displayed.
The President also enjoyed viewing for the first time with Dr. and Mrs. Carson the exhibit dedicated to his extraordinary life.  Similarly, Alveda King, who had never viewed the museum’s exhibit on her uncle, the President was honored that he was able to share this experience with the two of them specifically.
The President further expressed his appreciation for the tour, and said he looks forward to returning again.  His desire is to honor the immense contributions of courageous African American leaders throughout our history by building a more unified country, dedicated to liberty and justice.
This afternoon, the President will have a routine, classified National Security Council briefing in the Situation Room, in addition to his Presidential Daily Briefing, which he received earlier this morning. 
Then, this evening the President will have dinner with Vice President Pence.  I’m sure that they will discuss the Vice President's recent trip to Europe.  The Vice President was an incredible representative for our nation and the President during his time, where he reiterated our support for our European allies in unified pursuit of the noble ideals of freedom, democracy, and justice, and the rule of law and discussing how to do more to encourage all NATO allies to meet their financial obligations and commitments.  
During his speech before the Munich Security Conference on Saturday, the Vice President conveyed the administration’s unwavering commitment to Europe’s peace and prosperity, especially remembering the tens of thousands of Americans who gave their lives to defend those ideals during both World War I and II.  These shared sacrifices are the backbone of our alliance and our mission of security through strength.
During his time in Munich, the Vice President also met with nine world leaders.  The Vice President and these leaders discussed the issues most pressing to them, including the escalating violence in eastern Ukraine and the role of NATO in the fight against ISIS.  The Vice President also met in Brussels with President of Tusk -- Vice President Tusk of the Council of the European Union and NATO Secretary -- the NATO Secretary General. 
As a candidate for office, President Trump actually called attention repeatedly to the fact that for too long, many of our NATO allies have not been sharing the financial burden.  The President looks forward to working closely with NATO to advance our shared objectives.  A strong NATO means a safer world.  And the United States looks forward to working with our partners in NATO to achieve just that.
Looking ahead to the President’s upcoming schedule -- tomorrow, he will meet with Secretary of State Tillerson, fresh off his trip to Germany for the G20 Foreign Ministers Summit.  They'll discuss the President’s foreign policy agenda and the Secretary’s upcoming trip to Mexico.
Thursday morning, he'll have a listening session regarding job creation in the manufacturing sector with CEOs and business leaders from different industries.
On Friday, he'll deliver remarks to the Conservative Political Action Conference.  And we are just one week out today from the President’s Joint Address to Congress. 
The President will continue to work closely with his team to craft a speech that lays out his ambitious policy agenda that will benefit all Americans.  Plans are currently in the works for pre- and post-address activities for the President and his staff.  And we'll have more updates as the week goes on.
Before I take your questions, I want to address the recent threats and acts of vandalism on Jewish community centers throughout the country.  The President said this morning -- I just want to reiterate -- "The anti-Semitic threats targeting our Jewish community centers are horrible and painful, and a very sad reminder of the work that we must do" -- excuse me -- "the work that must be done to root out hate and prejudice and evil."
With that, I’ll take some of your questions.  Jim Stinson. 
Q    Sean, thank you.  I was curious if the President regrets or wants to clarify his characterization -- by the way, I have two questions -- of the media as an "enemy of the American people."
MR. SPICER:  I think the President has been very clear that certain outlets have gone out of their way to not represent his record accurately, and it is a concern to him.
And I think some reporters -- he has deep respect for the First Amendment, for the role of the press -- I’ve addressed this multiple times in the past.  He has a healthy respect for the press.  But I think that it’s a two-way street, as I’ve also said before, and I think that the President understands that certain outlets have gone out of their way to not be completely accurate and fair in their coverage of what’s going on.
Q    Speaking of the media, I’ve noticed two times in the last week that you’ve been directly contradicted by two members of the media, one of them Bill Maher of HBO, who said that in front of guests at Mar-a-Lago, the President was briefed on the classified North Korean situation.
MR. SPICER:  Say that again, I’m sorry.
Q    The President and the Prime Minister of Japan were briefed in front of guests --
MR. SPICER:  No, I didn’t say that.
Q    No, no, no, this is what was being said on HBO, that the President and the Prime Minister were briefed on classified information in front of guests at Mar-a-Lago.  I just want to clarify, did that happen?  Did they --
MR. SPICER:  No.  No.  I think I walked through this timeline before, Jim.  And it’s amazing -- a photo gets put out, the President has got a piece of paper, and the immediate conclusion is he’s got to be talking about classified information.
The President was briefed on the situation in North Korea prior to the dinner, in a SCIF, that’s at Mar-a-Lago.  He went and had dinner.  He discussed the logistics of the press conference, which I’ve talked to you all before -- there was a question as to where to hold the press conference.  They had a discussion about the logistics of it.  And subsequent to that dinner, he was briefed again in a SCIF with updates on the situation in North Korea.  That’s it, plain and simple.  
But to your first question, I think that it’s amazing that the immediate jump of conclusion to several outlets was, well, there’s a piece of paper, it must be classified.  I don’t -- it’s amazing to see that and to see people jump to that conclusion that he’s surrounded by his staff and members of the Japanese delegation, the conclusion is they must be doing something nefarious or wrong.  In fact, he followed every procedure that’s laid out.
And I think in some cases, it’s disheartening to realize that those are the kind of immediate conclusions that somebody jumps to.  So when you talk about coverage, we have a free press.  We have the right for people to say and do what they believe.  But at some point, it is incumbent upon people to try to get it right.  And in that case, it wasn’t even attempted.  It was a jump to conclusion by many to say that there must be something else going on when, in fact, we were able to provide a very, very clear tick-tock as to what had happened in that.
Jessica.
Q    Sean, a question about the resignation of 10 people on the Asian American Council.  That happened last week.  And in the letter, they said in part, “We can no longer serve a President whose policies aim to create outcomes that are diametrically opposite to our principles, goals and charge.”  First of all, what’s the White House’s reaction?  And do you plan to appoint your own members to this council?
MR. SPICER:  Those members of that council were political appointees of the Obama administration.  Their terms were set to expire this year.  So it’s not surprising in the sense that they were appointees of Barack Obama.  They were going to have their terms expire.
Q    But in terms of --
But again, but -- I get it, but most political appointees from other agencies or whatever would automatically resign because of the term of these individuals, they would carry through until later in the year.  But I don’t think it’s surprising that people who were appointed by Barack Obama to fulfill his agenda suddenly understand that there is a new administration in town and didn’t want to stay on board.
But we will make sure that we appoint people to this task force.  It’s important.  It’s something that’s provided guidance to multiple presidents in the past, and we will continue to do that.
Shannon.
Q    On the statement today about the anti-Semitic acts, what specifically is the President going to do to address that issue?  And, along those lines, there were reports earlier on that he was considering changing the mandate of this countering violent extremism program to focus just on Islamic extremist groups.  Is he still considering that, or would he also leave the scope of the program to also consider --
MR. SPICER:  Are you talking about the travel executive order?
Q    No, no, no, this is the countering violent extremism program that --
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think we’re getting ahead of ourselves there.  There’s nothing to announce on that front.  And secondly, to the first part of your question, I think the President is going to do what he’s talked about since election night.  It’s through deed and action, talk about how we can unify this country and speak out against hate, anti-Semitism, racism.  And he’s going to continue to do that.
And I think that he will show you over the course of months and years, through what he does in terms of his policies and his speech, that he is going to be a President that brings people together, that unites them, and that speaks very, very forcefully against those who are seeking to do hate or to tear people down because of their religion or their gender or the color of their skin.  I mean, those are all things that I think the President was clear on.
John.
Q    Two questions unrelated, if I could.  The next big piece in the immigration profile here at the White House is going to be the new executive order.  Is the President confident that this one will pass legal muster?  And if he is, what gives him that confidence?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think -- first, I want to be clear that we feel confident that we’re still going to prevail on the case -- the merits of the case.  I think that as was seen in the case of Massachusetts, once it is fully adjudicated, we will prevail because the authority is granted to the President to do what he has to, to protect the country.  So I feel very, very confident about where we're going to go.
The second track that he's made very clear as well is that until that occurs, we're going to have a dual-track system.  And then we're going to make sure that we implement a second executive order that is tailored to achieve the same goals but in accordance with what the court said.  So we've been working very closely with the Department of State, Department of Homeland Security, Department of Justice and the team here at the White House to make sure that the next step achieves the President's goal of protecting the country and does so in a way that recognizes the concerns that the court had until we prevail at a later time.  So it's a dual-track thing.
Q    Will this administration send American terror suspects picked up overseas to Guantanamo Bay for interrogation or prosecution?
MR. SPICER:  I am not going to discuss that right now.  As the President has said very clearly before, we don't telegraph what we're going to do.  I think he has made very clear, though, that he believes that Guantanamo Bay does serve a very, very healthy purpose in our national security in making sure that we don't bring terrorists to our seas.  But I'm not going to get into what we may or may not do in the future.
Q    Including American citizens?
MR. SPICER:  Again, I'm just not going to --
Q    Sean, I want to give you a chance to respond to something because I think the President's remarks and your clarification about where he stands on anti-Semitism is clear.  But after that statement was made by the President, The Anne Frank Center released a pretty strongly worded one, saying that these remarks, while well-received, are a Band-Aid on the cancer within the Trump administration, saying that there is, whether blessed or otherwise, a sense of xenophobia within this administration.  What do you think about that?
MR. SPICER:  Look, the President has made clear since the day he was elected and, frankly, going back through the campaign, that he is someone who seeks to unite this country.  He has brought a diverse group of folks into his administration, both in terms of actual positions and people that he has sought the advice of.  And I think he has been very forceful with his denunciation of people who seek to attack people because of their hate -- excuse me, because of their religion, because of their gender, because of the color of their skin.  And it is something that he is going to continue to fight and make very, very clear that he has no place in this administration. 
But I think that it's ironic that no matter how many times he talks about this, that it's never good enough.  Today I think was an unbelievably forceful comment by the President as far as his denunciation of the actions that are currently targeted towards Jewish community centers, but I think that he's been very clear previous to this that he wants to be someone that brings this country together and not divide people, especially in those areas.
So I saw that statement.  I wish that they had praised the President for his leadership in this area.  And I think that hopefully, as time continues to go by, they recognize his commitment to civil rights, to voting rights, to equality for all Americans.
Q    Sean, on that, the southern part of -- 
MR. SPICER:  We started early with the two questions.
Q    Sorry.  Sean, Southern Poverty -- I think you'll want to respond to this.
MR. SPICER:  Okay.
Q    Southern Poverty Law Center said that the number of anti-Muslim groups in the U.S. has tripled between 2015 and 2016, during the time of the campaign.  Is this message within the administration -- anti-Semitism is not allowed, xenophobia is not allowed -- anti-Muslim sentiment within the administration, has the President been forceful about that particular issue?
MR. SPICER:  I think that the President, in terms of his desire to combat radical Islamic terrorism, he understands that people who want to express a peaceful position have every right in our Constitution.  But if you come here or want to express views that seek to do our country or our people harm, he is going to fight it aggressively, whether it's domestic acts that are going on here or attempts through people abroad to come into this country.  So there's a big difference between preventing attacks and making sure that we keep this country safe so that there is no loss of life in allowing people to express themselves in accordance with our First Amendment.  Those are two very, very different, different, different things.  
Q    Sean, you talked about how the manufacturing -- I didn't know where you were going.
MR. SPICER:  I was (inaudible) in the back.  (Laughter.)  
Q    I saw the manufacturing CEOs are coming on Thursday, so let me ask you something that's important to them, which is the border adjustment tax.   The President earlier this year called it "too complicated."  Does he still feel that way?  And whether he feels this is complicated or not, is there something within the administration one way or another about whether the President, the administration wants to see this in or out of the tax package?
MR. SPICER:  So there’s several pieces to that that I’ll try to unpack.  That counts as, like, eight questions.  
Q    Does he feel it’s complicated, and what’s your preference?
MR. SPICER:  So, first of all, on the meeting on Thursday, this is going to be a really historic opportunity for CEOs to come in and talk to members of the White House staff and others through various agencies about how we can create jobs, how regulations are stifling economic growth.  And I think we’ll have further details on that, but this is going to be a real interesting opportunity to really create a dialogue I think in a manner that hasn’t been done before -- but I’m not going to get ahead of myself on this -- where we can really discuss some of the inhibitors to job creation, job retraining, what do we need for American workers to get them ahead of the curve.
With respect to specific policy positions, I think the President has been very clear that in the next couple weeks we expect to have a tax plan that gets out there.  That is being worked on continuously.  And so I’m not going to get in front of that.  While the CEOs are here, I’m sure beyond some of these things, that’s an opportunity for them to express what some of those policies are that are both helping them create jobs and grow the economy, and also inhibiting them.  So let’s let that conversation play out.  
Yes.
Q    Okay, thank you, Sean.  My name is Raquel (ph) from TV Global News (ph) Brazil.  And I have a question.  There are doubts in Brazil right now about what’s going to happen to the relationship between the two countries with the new administration, especially related to immigration and also to trade deals.  Does President Trump also plan to review policies -- bilateral policies with Brazil in trade deals?  And also, my second question, how does the administration see the current turmoil -- economical and political turmoil in Brazil?  
And one more question, if I might.  (Laughter.)  President Trump spoke with some foreign leaders from South America, like Argentina, Colombia and Peru, but not -- it was the Vice President that spoke with President Temer from Brazil.  Why is that?
MR. SPICER:  Well, obviously, we cherish our relationship with Brazil.  I think there’s a timing factor here and I think we’ll look forward to speaking with the President soon.  So I wouldn’t read too much into that right now.  It’s just a matter of getting things on the schedule.
We’re going to review all the trade deals that are out there.  The President has made very clear some of them have occurred well into a decade, two decades ago.  I think the idea is to make sure that we are looking at all of the trade deals we have throughout the globe to make sure that they continue to benefit America and American workers.    And in many cases, we can update these deals.  
So it’s not any one particular country.  I think that we’re going to look throughout the whole host of trade agreements, and then other trade-related agreements that we have with countries to make sure that they are the most up-to-date and they address the technological advances that have occurred, and look at the various services -- whether it’s financial services or manufacturing -- and that they reflect the current state of play.
So this isn’t any one country.  I think the President made clear throughout the campaign and subsequent that he wants to review every trade deal to make sure that America and American workers are maintaining the best deal possible.
Corbett (ph).  Oh, I’m sorry.
Q    And on the turmoil, how does the administration see the turmoil in Brazil now?
MR. SPICER:  I’m going to -- I think that’s a question for the Department of State right now.  
Corbett, yeah.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Two questions for you.  One on the NSC meeting later this afternoon.  Is that the first meeting of the National Security Council of the President with all the principals there?
MR. SPICER:  No, that is just a routine briefing.  But because of the nature of it, it’s happening in the Situation Room.
Q    But is that with staff, or is that with --
MR. SPICER:  Staff.
Q    Okay, so it’s not with, like, the principals committee. 
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    When do you anticipate the first formal meeting of the National Security Council?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think General McMaster got here at noon today, so -- (laughter) -- we move fast, but I think that we need to give him a few days probably to get his team together.
So the President was obviously very pleased with the selection.  I think when you saw the bipartisan support that General McMaster received from the variety of the political spectrum -- people who have served Republicans and Democrats, academics, pundits, columnists -- you know that he made an outstanding choice.  We want to get him in, show him around the office a little bit, and then get him going.
But when we have a date to announce the next meeting, we’ll let you know.
Q    The joint address for next week, what’s the President’s goal for that address?
MR. SPICER:  I think that -- I’ll have a further update as the week goes on, and we’ll have briefings.  The President is going to lay out I think two main things -- where we’ve come and where we’re going.  I think that he is very pleased with the progress that he has made so far in the first month in office, and I think it’s an opportunity to remind members of Congress and the American people what he promised them on the campaign trail, what he’s done already in a very significant way to achieve and fulfill those promises that he made, but also talk about the challenges that we have as a nation and where we’re going.  And that’s everything from our relationship with other countries in this world to some of the various domestic problems that we face, the challenges that we face in cities, health care, education.
But the President wants to make sure that the American people have a very clear indication as to where he’s taking this country and why he’s going to enact the policies he’s going to enact.
John.  George, I’m sorry.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  Let me ask you a question about the Vice President’s European trip.  I’m curious whether he received any commitments from our European allies to commit more in terms of their financial contribution to NATO.
MR. SPICER:  I think several of them -- I saw Chancellor Merkel’s comments previous to that, noting that they understand that the U.S. is asking for that commitment.
Look, we’re one of the only countries -- there’s a handful -- that are doing what NATO requires, which is 2 percent of GDP.  Some of them are at 1.2, 1.3, 1.5, and some of them are below that.  But we’ve got to ask them to do what they agreed to do.  And I think we’ve had a very positive reaction from most of these NATO countries that understand that the financial agreement that they agreed to is something that they need to live up to.  
And I think the Vice President continued to receive assurances, much like the President has through his foreign leader calls, where people not only understand it but are willing to follow through on it.
Q    So it’s an ongoing process, or --
MR. SPICER:  Of course it’s an ongoing -- I mean, I think we need to follow up to make sure that the commitments that they’re making on the phone or in person, in the case of the Vice President, are followed up.
Dave.
Q    Sean, thanks.  The DHS memos today -- obviously these immigration enforcement efforts cost money, hiring more agents.
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    Do you envision that the current budget is sufficient, or are you going to need to go to Congress for more money?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think right now ICE and DHS in particular, as well as CBP, are looking at what this is going to cost and how much and putting a request together, and then figuring out how much can be handled through reallocation of resources and how much we can save maybe in another area, but then also work with Congress.
Q    One other subject, different matter.  There was an election report out today that the President raised more small campaign donations in 2016 than either Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders combined.  Did he have a reaction to that?  Has he seen that?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know, and I would ask you to probably go through the RNC for that.  That’s a political matter that we generally don’t discuss.
Yeah.
Q    Sean, the National Center for Transgender Equality, citing reliable sources, says the Trump administration today will rescind Obama-era guidance requiring schools to allow transgender kids to use the restroom consistent with their gender identity.  Will the Trump administration rescind that guidance?
MR. SPICER:  Right now that’s an issue that the Department of Justice and the Department of Education are addressing.  I would tell you that -- and I think that there will be further guidance coming from DOJ in particular with respect to not just the executive order, but also the case that’s in front of the Supreme Court.  
The President has maintained for a long time that this is a states' rights issue and not one for the federal government.  So while there will be further guidance coming out on this, I think that all you have to do is look at what the President’s view has been for a long time -- that this is not something that the federal government should be involved in; this is a states' rights issue.   
Matt.
Q    In the wake of the Vice President’s trip to Europe, there’s questions as to the administration’s position on the future of the European Union with regard to a number of political movements across the continent advocating for the disbandment eventually of the European Union.  I wanted to see if you could clarity the administration’s position on the future of the European Union.
MR. SPICER:  I think the Vice President had great meetings with several European Union leaders and made it very clear to them that we’ll continue to work with them, and reaffirmed our commitment to working with these nations.  I mean, there’s no update on that.
Cecilia.
Q    Thank you.  On immigration, on the DHS memo, two parts, if I may.  Is one of the goals here mass deportation?
MR. SPICER:  No, not at all.  This isn’t -- look, I think what we have to get back to is understanding a couple things.  There’s a law in place that says if you’re in this country illegally, that we have an obligation to make sure that the people who are in our country are here legally.  What the order sets out today is ensures that the million-or-so people that have been adjudicated already, that ICE prioritizes, creates a system of prioritization, and makes sure that we walk through that system in a way that protects this country.
This is consistent with everything the President has talked about, which is prioritizing the people who are here who represent a threat to public safety or have a criminal record.  And all this does is lay out the exact procedures to make sure that that subgroup of people who pose a threat to our nation because of a conviction or a violation of public safety or have a criminal record are adjudicated first and foremost.  That's it, plain and simple.
Q    So is then -- a follow-up to that.  Is the White House's message to date to undocumented people in this country whose only crime is being in this country illegally, "Don't worry, or you're on notice"?
MR. SPICER:  No, the message from this White House and from the DHS is that those people who are in this country and pose a threat to our public safety or have committed a crime will be the first to go and we will be aggressively making sure that that occurs.  That is what the priority is.
Q    What about the others who aren't?  They're watching this fearful right now.
MR. SPICER:  Cecilia, the President has said multiple times that we've got to look at this issue on a very, very holistic way.  And the number-one priority when you look at the scope of how many people are in the country illegally, the number-one priority is making sure that people who pose a threat to this country are immediately dealt with.  And this is not a small group of people; we're talking close to a million people who have already been adjudicated and had their status processed through a formal due process system.
And so what we need to do now is to make sure that we focus the resources and the efforts on those people going first and foremost.  And the factsheet and the information that we put out lays that out very, very clearly what is being done.  But for so long, the people at ICE and CBP had their hands cuffed behind them.  And when they were going to deal with the mission of their job, the last administration had so many carve-outs for who could be and who couldn't be adjudicated that it made it very difficult for the customs and enforcement people to do their job and enforce the laws of this country.
But right now, what we've done is to make sure that they have the ability and the guidance and the resources to do what their mission is.  And that's it, plain and simple.  And the President is consistent with his priority of making sure that those people who pose a threat to this country are the first ones to go. 
Alexis.
Q    Sean, on immigration, just to follow up, the President has a carve-out himself for DACA.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.
Q    Can you explain the process -- expand on what you were saying on Thursday about the process that the administration is taking to decide --
MR. SPICER:  And this is what I was basically talking to Cecilia about, which is the President has made clear when you have 12, 14, 15 million people in the country illegally, that there has to be a system of priority.  And right now, ICE's priority is going to make sure that we focus first and foremost on that.  Specifically, in the guidance, it talks about the DACA and DAPA, unless someone who fits under that program fits into the sub-category is not subject to what is being dealt with now.
Remember, everybody who is here illegally is subject to removal at any time.  That is consistent with every country, not just ours.  If you're in this country in an illegal manner, that obviously there's a provision that could ensure that you be removed.  But the priority that the President has laid forward and the priority that ICE is putting forward through DHS's guidance is to make sure that the people who have committed a crime or pose a threat to our public safety are the priority of their efforts, first and foremost.
Katelyn.
Q    John Kasich --
Q    Let me follow.  The President has also, and his team has also had reservations about undocumented people in the United States who are beneficiaries of public assistance or access to benefits, either at the state or the federal level.  What is the President going to be doing to either issue guidance or executive action of some sort to indicate that he would like to preclude that from continuing?
MR. SPICER:  I think we have talked in the past about the respect that the President has for taxpayer money with respect to sanctuary cities and the enforcement measures that he's putting forward on immigration.  Right now, obviously, the actions today are focused on people who are in this country and what we need to do on our southern border to facilitate the building of the wall that he's talked about.  
So we're doing this one step at a time in a very methodical way, and right now the focus is to make sure that ICE and CBP and DHS have the authority and the resources to carry out that first mission.  We will have more -- and then continues to see that immigration is one of those issues that he was very, very clear and consistent on in the campaign, and we're going to continue to implement the policies that he talked about to keep the country safe.
Katelyn.
Q    Thank you.  John Kasich has been a very vocal critic of President Trump, even in the campaign, saying his immigration plan was crazy, his statement that the elections were rigged was silly, and he did not endorse him and did not vote for him.  What is the President hoping to accomplish with their meeting at the White House on Friday?
MR. SPICER:  So, Governor Kasich has reached out on multiple occasions to meet with the President to follow on, and the President has shown through the transition and since his time in office that he wants to meet with anybody that can help move this country forward and share in his vision.  I think that includes people who are with him, who are not with him, who are on the other side of the aisle, who are independents, union workers, business leaders.  
Now that he is President -- and, frankly, I would again date it back to the transition -- he understands that he's the President for every American.  And he's talked consistently about having a united country.  And you do that by bringing people together, whether or not they agree with you on every issue, or one or two issues.  But if there's common ground that can be found to move the country forward, then great.  And I think so many of the President's priority issues are issues that Ohio is dealing with and that he wants to make sure that he can continue to work with Governor Kasich so that every American benefits.
April.
Q    Did Kasich ask for the meeting?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    Okay, what did the President gain from his tour today?  You talked about where he visited, the exhibits that he visited.  Did he also visit slavery?  And the reason why I'm asking is, is because when he was candidate Trump, he said things like "we made this country," meaning white America, and not necessarily black.  Did he gain --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know why you would say that.  What do you mean?
Q    No, no, no, he said that.  I heard him say that.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, but look -- the answer to your question is -- one of the first exhibits that he visited was one of the slavery exhibits.  And the director walked him through some very amazing stories and statistics about where slavery was prevailing, not just in traditional Southern colonies but throughout the country.  So they did have a very robust discussion about slavery early on in the tour.  
And I think that it was a very eye-opening and powerful tour for him, and, frankly, for every American.  And I would encourage any American that can find the time and get in, because it's so popular.  But it really is enlightening as far as parts of our history that people may not fully appreciate or know, and the contributions and the sacrifices that so many Americans have made that are a critical piece to our history that sometimes don’t get the attention they deserve.  
So I think the President walked away from there -- and I mentioned in the remarks that he mentioned to Lonnie that he wanted to come back, because you can't do it justice.  And it's much like the Holocaust Museum where you go through it once and then you sit there and start thinking of all the things that you saw, and think, you know, I'd like to go back and more fully explore what I saw because it piqued some degree of interest or intellectual curiosity.  
But he was very taken aback.  It’s a very, very powerful institution and tour, and it covers a lot of ground.  I think he was really proud to share it with Dr. Carson.  I mean, when you walk through that museum and you see all of the elements of our history, when you walk up to this one glass exhibit that is Dr. Carson's scrubs and pictures of him, and to experience that with him and his wife for the first time, and you realize how amazing that is for any American to be part of a Smithsonian, and you're standing with Dr. Carson and his wife where he is experiencing it with you for the first time and how powerful that must have been was, I think, a real interesting opportunity for him to sit there, hand to hand, with another American and watch them be part of American history.  And you also appreciate some of the real contributions that Dr. Carson has made to medicine and the depth and breadth of his accomplishments.
Q    And lastly, kind of putting this with the next question, is there any advancement on the CBC meeting with the President?  And also, the head of the CBC said he was wondering if the President saw anything from current and past members of the CBC while he was in the museum, to get a little bit of information on them before this meeting happens.
MR. SPICER:  I'll have further updates on that.  I know the President looks forward to that meeting, and I think that we're in the process of trying to begin setting that up.  And so I'll have further updates on that once we get closer.  I know that we've got some additional work before the month concludes on Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and some meetings that we're working on with them.  But I want to get them locked in before I go further.
Q    What did he think about the members that he saw in the museum?
MR. SPICER:  Well, when you walk through one of them, there's a big jumbotron, and we paused for a while, and John Lewis was there giving a very powerful speech.  And we just paused and watched that for a little while.  So, again, I think that, respectfully, when you walk through a museum like this there's a lot of moments where you're just stopping and taking it in, and there's -- if you haven’t been there, you walk up this one ramp and they stop and there's two big screens, and one of them is a video screen, and it's a massive jumbotron --
Q    The civil rights --
MR. SPICER:  Right.  And we watched the video of John Lewis talking there and describing his efforts in championing voting and civil rights.
So I know the President paused and watched it and listened to it.  And again, I would just go back to how he described his overall -- we didn’t dissect the different things, but I watched him and it was a very powerful experience for him, and I know he looks forward to going back. 
Hallie.
Q    Sean, two questions for you.  First one on undocumented immigrants.  You just made very clear that the President's priority is to deport those who pose a threat to public safety.  
MR. SPICER:  Correct.
Q    I know you're familiar with the case in Arizona of the mother, Guadalupe Garcia de Rayos.  Is she a threat to this country?
MR. SPICER:  I'm going to leave that up to ICE.  We don’t get involved from the White House to particular cases.  That's not --
Q    But she's a symbol -- 
MR. SPICER:  You're right, and I understand.
Q    But is she a threat to public safety, though?
MR. SPICER:  But, Hallie, I think the answer is, is that ICE determined that she had violated the law in a way that was in accordance with this.  Again, we've got to go back to this idea that our job, especially here at the White House, isn’t to call balls and strikes and say, well, this person only violated part of the law, or let them go on this.  
If this was any other subject, if this was tax evasion and we said, well, they only really violated a little bit of -- they only cheated on their taxes a little, you wouldn’t be saying hey, should they really be going to be prison or should they be getting a fine?  At some point, laws are laws.  And if people have a problem with the law, whether it's at the local, state or federal issue, then we should petition our lawmakers and the executive at that particular branch of government and change it.  But our job shouldn’t be to figure out should this individual not have to abide by the law, should this individual get a pass.  If we want to change the law, we've got a very amazing process here in this country to both create and change laws.
And so I don’t want to comment on the specifics of any one case because I think that then puts the White House in a position of deciding who is following the law and who isn’t, and who should get a pass.  The bottom --
Q    But isn’t it different from you just said of prioritization of cases?  There's a difference -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, there's a difference.  When you have 13 or 14 million people, they're in the country -- you know, I think it's one thing to say prioritize people who pose a threat to public safety and go after this individual or that individual, or whatever.  There's no question, you have to have priorities in anything -- what do you do first, what do you do second, what do you do third.  And when you're talking about, 13, 14, 15, potentially more, millions of people in this country, the President needed to give guidance, especially after what they went through in the last administration where there were so many carve-outs that ICE agents and CBP members had to figure out each individual whether or not they fit in a particular category and they could adjudicate that case.  The President wanted to take the shackles off individuals in these agencies and say:  You have a mission, there are laws that need to be followed; you should do your mission and follow the law.  And for specific cases, I would refer you to ICE in particular and do that.
Q    Sean, where did you get the 13 and 14 million number?
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, Hallie is on number two.
Q    Thank you.
Q    The 13, 14 million number -- where did you get that number?
MR. SPICER:  Glenn, will you please not interrupt her?
Q    Do you want to take that now?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, I think -- I'm not going to allow you to be interrupted. 
Q    So the second question is on the anti-Semitism comments that you referenced from the podium, the President made very clear.  You said, though, that he has taken opportunities in the past.  Just last week, though, he had the opportunities to deliver a message to the American people about anti-Semitism.  He made very clear he was not anti-Semitic and he was, in fact, insulted by that.  But as far as a broader message to the American people, he declined to offer one.   Is the President comfortable with his obligation as the leader of this country to deliver that kind of broad and forceful message to Americans?  And if so, why didn’t he do it sooner in the case of these attacks?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the idea, Hallie, that -- he has.  And I think there's a point at which he talked literally on election night about uniting this country and making sure that all Americans, et cetera.  And every time there's an instance, it's interesting -- I mean, I get a question, "Is he going to denounce this one, is he going to denounce this one?"  At some point, the question is asked and answered.  He has stood very forcefully against --
Q    That's not what I'm asking.  I'm not asking --
MR. SPICER:  What are you --
Q    I'm asking, is he comfortable with his role as the person who needs to be delivering a broader message to America, not denouncing it, which he did clearly today.
MR. SPICER:  Right.  And I think that he is very comfortable and understands that as the leader of the free world, the President of this country, the Commander-in-Chief, that he has an awesome responsibility to make it very clear where we're going as a country and what our values are, and that he has spoken very forcefully that we don’t stand for this kind of behaviors, and words, and intolerance, that we are a country that should bring people together and that we shouldn’t tolerate people who are hating on individuals because of their gender or because of their religion or the color of their skin, or a variety of other things, but that there's a point at which it's asked and answered.  
And I think the President has been very clear over and over again, going back through the campaign, the transition and now, that that's the kind of President that he wants to be, that's the kind of country that he wants to lead.
Trey.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Following the DHS memos this morning, the ACLU said the courts won't allow these orders to become a reality.  How is the administration preparing for another potential legal battle?  And do you have any response to the ACLU?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think we have done a phenomenal job of working with the various departments, particularly DHS and DOJ, State, and through the White House staff, to make sure that we are well within any concerns that the court might have.  
And as I mentioned, I think it's important to continue to emphasize we feel as though the first one did that as well, and we were vindicated several times in the court.  We have an issue with the 9th Circuit and I think we will overcome that, ultimately, on the merits.  But in the meantime, a dual-track is something that we wanted to pursue to make sure that we do everything we can, as I mentioned before, to keep the country safe.
Q    Sean, thank you.  The Australian foreign minister is here today, meeting the Vice President.
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry, say that again.
Q    The Australian foreign minister is meeting the Vice President today and also the Secretary of State tomorrow.  I guess we can assume that the U.S.-Australia refugee deal will come up.  Now, last time we spoke, the President was still considering and reviewing a deal.  Can you just update us on what the current position is?
MR. SPICER:  We'll have a readout of that.
Q    And just -- 
MR. SPICER:  Okay, of course everyone gets two.  (Laughter.)
Q    If you could just update us on the current position on the deal.  And also, given that recent exposure on the President's distaste for it, will Australia be expected to return the favor?
MR. SPICER:  Look, again, I would wait.  We'll have a readout after that call as far as what they discussed.  But I've got nothing -- I don't want to get ahead of the Vice President's meeting with either the Secretary of State or the Vice President.
Kristen.
Q    Thank you.  I have two questions.  One, on the immigration refugee executive order that we're expecting in the coming days, so that it withstands legal challenges, can you tell us what the language might look like as it relates to Syrian refugees?
MR. SPICER:  I appreciate the effort, but when we have it ready we'll get it out.  And I think part of this is -- 
Q    (Inaudible) ban on Syrian refugees?
MR. SPICER:  Excuse me?  Again, I appreciate the second try, but we're not ready to announce it.  And part of it is, is that we're making sure that it is completely ready to go.  And so when we have that, we will get it out to you.  And I would just -- the reason that we haven't announced it is it's not ready to be announced.
Q    I want to try one more on --
MR. SPICER:  Of course.  
Q    -- the comments that the President made today about anti-Semitism.  In terms of the timing, obviously he was asked about it, but they also came after his daughter, Ivanka, sent out that tweet.  Has she counseled him?  Was she one of the people saying it's important for you to forcefully denounce this?  Why today?
MR. SPICER:  Because the President was visiting the African American Museum, he wanted to make it very clear.  I think it was very powerful that, while there, and while understanding the struggles of so many -- and we talk about how one of the beauties of history is that we don't repeat itself.  And I think that when you're at a museum like that and seeing the struggles that so many Americans faced and overcame, that you want to remind people that there is still issues that our country is grappling with and that there is no place for that hate and for that language.
And I think -- as I mentioned, it was a very powerful opportunity for him to say that and to make clear, again, what his opinions were.
Q    Does he regret not doing it last week, Sean?
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry?
Q    Does he regret not stating this comment last week?
MR. SPICER:  The President was very clear.  That was a very -- I think, as I mentioned to Hallie, he has discussed this over and over again.  I think there's a point to which his position is abundantly clear.  His attempts and his desire and his rhetoric to unite the country has been expressed over and over again.
Sarah.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  The New York Times is reporting that Trump's budget director is preparing a budget that eliminates the Export-Import Bank.  But several lawmakers, including Senator Heitkamp, have come out of private meetings with President Trump and said that in those private meetings he expressed support for the export bank.  So which is it?  Does he support Ex-Im or does he support eliminating it?
MR. SPICER:  I can confirm that the OMB director -- the budget director is working on a budget.  (Laughter.)  Beyond that, I'm not going to get ahead of the OMB director right now.  They are drafting a budget, they are talking to members of Congress and other interested parties about funding levels and such, but we're not at a position to go yet.
Yes.
Q    Sean, just wanted to circle on Alexis's question.  Since the DHS guidance did not eliminate DACA, does that mean that the program is remaining in place, that it's a settled matter and it's not going away?
MR. SPICER:  No, Jordan.  What it means is that this particular enforcement is tailored to what I have been referencing over and over again -- that what we're talking about today is the implementation of those two executive orders, one specifically that's tasking the agencies under DHS to address a very specific problem of the million or so, plus or minus, people that they have identified, that they have then adjudicated with already going through the process to be adjudicated and taken out of the country.
Q    That means a decision on DACA could come any day. 
MR. SPICER:  That's right, exactly.  It just means that this -- what it means, more than anything, is that this order does not address that and it's very clear in the Q&A -- and, again, I would refer you back to DHS's website that has all of that.
Goyal.
Q    Thank you very much.  Two questions please.  One, it's been one month on the job for you and for the President, and you are already talk of the town around the globe.  (Laughter.)  My two questions are, one -- 
MR. SPICER:  My wife would disagree with you.  (Laughter.)  It's not always positive, too.
Q    It looks like, Sean, that the President's order is working at least around the globe because more than 60,000 Pakistanis have been deported by Saudi Arabia.  But they're saying that they were illegals and also they're a threat to the country.  And also, at the same time, Pakistani government is arresting hundreds of terrorists inside the country.  Any presidential message?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I'm not going to -- there's nothing that I have in terms of an update of what's going on in Pakistan.  I would refer you to the Department of State with respect to specific policies.  But the broader point that you're making is I think each country needs to look at what they need to do to control the people that are entering their country and keep their people safe.
When you look at our laws in particular, and compare them to so many other countries around the globe, we actually tend to probably fall in the lower end of how tough our immigration policies are vis-à-vis someone else.
Q    Sean, my second question.
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry.
Q    As far as illegal immigrants are concerned in the U.S., millions of illegal immigrants that were waiting for the last eight or ten years that they might see a light in the dark tunnel, and now they’re hoping that President Trump will have a light for them.  So what is the President’s message for them who are in this country for five, 10, 15 or 20 years but they’re not -- they don’t have any criminal records?
MR. SPICER:  Well, look, the President has said before he’s got a big heart.  And I think that as we continue to develop policy on immigration, it’s going to be, as we’ve talked about in the past, prioritized -- what we go after first, second third.  The President has made very clear he understands the plight of some of those individuals.  He’s got a big heart.  He understands the impact it has on many families, many communities.
But we will continue to develop policies that will address that.  And again, today’s focus is specifically on those two executive orders, and I’m going to limit it to that.
Q    Sean, at the beginning of the month, Senator John McCain sent a letter to the President requesting that the administration provide arms to Ukrainians fighting Russian separatists within their country.  When will the President respond to Senator McCain’s letter?  And what is the administration’s position on lethal aid to Ukrainians fighting Russian separatists?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t have anything for you on that.  I’ll try to get back to you on that.  I know that we’re very pleased to watch Senator McCain praise the pick of General McMaster.  That’s obviously someone that we will consult with.  But we were pleased to see so much support for him.
Scott Newman (ph).
Q    On Russia -- critics of the President have said that at time he doesn’t talk tough enough on the subject.  General McMaster, though, has been labeled by a lot of people as being pretty hawkish.  I’m curious what, if any, difference in tone or tenor or strategy we should expect now that they’re working together.
Q    Well, I think, as I mentioned a couple times, I think there is widespread praise for General McMaster and his understanding and command of national security matters, foreign policy matters.  He’s going to be a great asset to the President’s national security team.
But ultimately, the President has always been the decider, whether it’s Russia or any other issue.  And I think you’re right, he has made it very clear that if he can get a deal with Russia, something that the last several administrations have tried to do, that he’s going to do it.  And if he can’t, he won’t.  But he is going to try.  And I think his success as a businessman and negotiator should be seen as a positive sign for him to be able to do that.
But he understands that if he can find common ground on defeating ISIS and combatting terrorism, growing the economy where we can find areas of economic interest, then we’re going to do it.  But that’s where we’re going to continue to work with Russia if we can.  He’ll get a deal.  If he can’t, he won’t.  But he’s going to try.  And I think where others have failed, he’s going to make sure that he does everything possible to make sure that if it’s in the interest of the United States he will get a deal.
Q    I have another question on General McMaster.  So how much leeway is he going to get to restructure, to bring on his own people?  There were some reports that Admiral Harward was not allowed to, or others as well.  So can you address that?
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  I can.  He will have 100 percent.  The President has been very, very clear with that.  He is the National Security Advisor, and he will have whatever he needs to implement a successful team.  
But with respect to Admiral Harward that you brought up, Admiral Harward made it very, very clear that he wanted this job, he would love to take it.  He was impressed with the team.  But during the course of discussions, it came up -- he said: Before I continue with this discussion, I need to address some financial and family concerns.  He went back, he came back to us and said, I am unable to continue the discussions because of there’s some financial concerns and some family issues that we have.  I spent 40 years serving this country in the United States Navy.
I talked to him again Saturday night, and he said:  If there’s another opening in a year or two, I would be honored, I am so impressed with the team that’s there. 
And I would urge people to actually talk to him.  He was so excited about being part of the team.  He was available to as many reporters as he could take.  We gave out his information -- his contact information.  And he’s been very clear.  He wrote a letter to the President prior to -- first thing Tuesday morning.  He was in the UAE, he sent the letter over and we had it first thing in the morning, where he said, because of family concerns, because of some financial constraints, having served this nation for 40 years, I can’t take this job, but I'm unbelievably impressed.  
All of the rumors about the discretion that he would have over staff or any other thing were 100 percent false.  He's made it clear that he would love to serve in the future, that he was impressed with the team, that he wanted to do this.  There were just some constraints financially and family-wise that come with -- or after having served 40 years in the military, sacrifices both financially and family-wise that he had had to make.  
But I talked to him several times, and the team has talked to him.  But ultimately, the President was very, very impressed with General McMaster.  He had always been one of the individuals that he thought stood above so many other folks.  He was impressed with the entire list, John Bolton and others.  But so many people had spoken to him.  General Mattis, Tom Cotton, other senators really praised General McMaster's command of the issues, his management, his style, his understanding of the geopolitical landscape.  And I think that's why you saw such amazing widespread bipartisan praise for him, and why he will be such an asset to the national security team.  So, ultimately, we ended up with the best choice.  And I think that's going to benefit not just this administration but our entire nation.
Q    Sean, can we expect him to get anyone else from the top of -- any senior people at the NSC?
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry?
Q    Can we expect that he may replace any others in the NSC?
MR. SPICER:  Again, I just can't be any clearer.  I think that we've got an amazing team.  He's been impressed with them.  But the President has, as he did with other candidates, told them that they would lead the team and that he would have the discretion of it.
Jeff.
Q    I just wanted to follow on that.  You said that he has the full authority to structure his office as he sees fit.  Does that extend to the principals committee, as well?  After he comes in and takes a look at the whole apparatus, if he advises the President and he would prefer not to have the chief strategist as a member of the principals committee, would the President --
MR. SPICER:  I think the President has made clear to him he's got full authority to structure the national security team the way he wants.  Obviously, with something like that, he would come to the President and make that recommendation.  But the President would take that under serious consideration.  I don’t want to go ahead with this person or that person or structure, but the President made it very clear with him and the other candidates that they had 100 percent control and authority over the national security committee.
Thank you, guys.  I'll see you tomorrow.
Q    Will McMaster have to retire?  Can you clarify that?
MR. SPICER:  No, he will stay on active duty.  
Q    Does that require Senate confirmation then?
MR. SPICER:  No.  He will stay on active duty.  That was the case with Powell and I think some other folks.
Q    One more clarification just before you go.  So when the new EO comes out, you won't rescind the original one and you'll leave it in place?
MR. SPICER:  That's correct.  Yes.  Thank you, guys.
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 2/22/2017, #14
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
12:55 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon, everyone.  I wanted to wait until the President finished up with his remarks on the budget before I came out.  As you saw, he's -- a really good opportunity to sit down with his team.  It's clearly been a busy day here at the White House again, so I'm going to kind of keep it quick and get to your questions.
This morning, after receiving his daily intelligence briefing, the President met with Secretary of State Tillerson.  As you all know, Secretary Tillerson and Secretary Kelly will travel to Mexico City later today as one of their first foreign trips.  It’s significant that the President is sending the secretaries to Mexico so early in the administration. 
It’s symbolic of the meaningful relationship that our two nations have.  These are important meetings regarding the President’s agenda to improve the quality of lives for both people of Mexico and the United States by combatting drug traffickers and finding ways to bolster both our economies through a broader relationship that promotes commerce and legal immigration.  This is a very encouraging start to a working relationship with an incredible neighbor to the south.
At this moment, the President has just wrapped up his discussions on the federal budget with some of the officials and staff who will be instrumental in the work to put this country back on a responsibly fiscal path.
Joining the meeting were Reince Priebus, the Chief of Staff; Steve Bannon; Jared Kushner; Gary Cohn, the Director of the National Economic Council; Secretary Steve Mnuchin of the Department of Treasury; Director Mulvaney of the Office of Management and Budget; Russ Vought of the Office of Management and Budget; and Emma Doyle of Office of Management and Budget.
As the President mentioned last week, we look forward to presenting our tax reform plan and providing much-needed tax reform and relief to the hardworking men and women of our nation.  The President is going to restore and respect the American taxpayer by enabling them to keep more of their hard-earned money, and by making sure the federal government spends money more responsibly.  After the lunch, the President will continue this important discussion with other members of the senior staff.
Additionally, the Vice President today is in St. Louis to participate in listening sessions with American workers and employees of the Fabick Cat equipment and engineer* [engine] dealer, a 100-year-old family-owned and operated business.
During his visit, the Vice President will discuss the economic comeback in store for our nation under the President’s economic agenda and with small business owners and employees.  The President has already made strides towards slashing redundant regulations through his executive actions, and we will work with Congress to enact further pro-growth legislation. 
Back to the President’s schedule.  Later this afternoon, the President will participate in his standing legislative affairs strategy session.  Our legislative affairs team is in constant contact with our counterparts on the Hill, keeping an open dialogue on all aspects of the President’s agenda.  Last week alone, more than 40 different senators and members of Congress visited the White House.
On the Supreme Court front, so far Judge Gorsuch has met with 58 senators -- 36 Republicans and 22 Democrats -- and he has more meetings already on the books for next week when the Senate returns to session.  We’ve been especially encouraged by the reception he’s received from several senior Democrats, including Senators Feinstein, Tester, Durbin, and Gillibrand.
Also on the confirmation front, multiple unions came out today for Alex Acosta, the President’s nominee for Labor Secretary. Both the Laborers' International Union of North America and the International Union of Operating Engineers praised his distinguished career and pledged their support for his nomination.
The legislative affairs team is using the congressional work period to coordinate with key coalitions in Congress.  They are meeting with different groups in the House and Senate, including the staff of the Congressional Black Caucus, House and Senate leadership, and staff throughout various committees.  We’ve used this work period as an opportunity to invite staffers from both sides of the aisle to come to the White House and discuss shared priorities and find common ground on the way forward.
And we’re not just reaching out to Capitol Hill, we've actively engaged with key leaders and policymakers around the country.  It’s critical to this administration that we gather input from states and from people throughout the country, rather than just leaders here in Washington.
Looking ahead to tomorrow, the President will meet with a group of world-class business leaders to discuss specific actions he can take to remove barriers to job creation.  These leaders, many of whom represent some of the country’s largest manufacturers, will begin the day in working groups with the Vice President, Cabinet members and key aides of the President’s staff.  The working groups will engage in a deep-dive conversation on the attendees’ specific areas of expertise. Topics of discussion include deregulation, tax and trade, training and the workforce of the future, and infrastructure.
Vice President Pence will be engaged with each of the groups.  And after the groups conclude their discussion, the President’s staff will compile the feedback and the President will sit down with the entire group for a listening session on some of their recommendations.
As you can tell by the structure of the meeting, the President is expecting these interactions to lead to real action being taken by the administration.  Creating a dynamic and booming economy that works for all Americans continues to be at the top of his domestic policy agenda.  As a successful businessman himself, the President knows that if we’re going to get the country back to work, we need to hear directly from job creators what is holding them back, and, where appropriate, take steps to remove the barriers.
In his first month in office, the President has already taken numerous actions to boost job creation, and key economic indicators are showing that it’s working.  CEO and [consumer] confidence are up, the stock market continues to reach record highs, and the January numbers were strong.  The meetings on Thursday will continue to build on that momentum.
And with that, I’m glad to take some questions.  Steve Holland.
Q    Steve Holland is not here. 
MR. SPICER:  Sorry, Jeff Mason gets it.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Can you give us an update on the administration's plans with regard to transgender bathrooms in schools?  And can you confirm that there has been some disagreement between Secretary DeVos and the Attorney General on this issue?
MR. SPICER:  So I would expect further guidance to come out on that today.  The President, as I said yesterday, is a firm believer in states' rights.  When you look at the guidance that was issued under the Obama administration -- first of all, let's remember, to the best of my knowledge, that was stalled and never fully implemented.  And I think there were various reasons for that -- several legal reasons and several procedural reasons.  And so the Department of Education and the Department of Justice, both who jointly issued that guidance back during the Obama administration, are now working together again under a Trump administration, they've been reviewing the guidance that was signed, the basis by which it was put through.  And I think there have been several areas of concern, both legal and procedural, that they have been discussing.  
And I think where you might be hearing something is more on the timing and the wording of stuff.  The conclusions, everybody in the administration is agreed upon.  There is no daylight between anybody -- between the President, between any of the Secretaries.  I think there has been some discussion between the timing of the issuance and recommendations, or between the exact wording.  
But as far as the conclusions go, I've made this clear and the President has made it clear throughout the campaign that he is a firm believer in states' rights and that certain issues like this are not best dealt with at the federal level.
Q    Sean, a report out today that some Cabinet Secretaries are bristling at what they see as the White House micromanaging staffing at the sub-Cabinet level.  To what degree does the White House think that it should impose its hiring approvals on members of the sub-Cabinet?  And is some of this at least partially driven by Cabinet Secretaries wanting to appoint people who might not necessarily be aligned with the President's thinking?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean, I think when you come to -- they're called political appointees for a reason.  The idea is that people who come into this government should want to support and enact the President's agenda that he campaigned on with the American people.  And I think one of the reasons that you see in recent polls the President -- people, even if they don't agree with the President, they give him high marks for following through on the promises that he's made to the American people and getting things done that he actually said, which is not always the case here in Washington.
And I think that we want to make sure that the people who staff a Trump administration are committed to a Trump agenda, and that's -- so Cabinet Secretaries and other administrators and directors have broad discretion.  But I think at the end of the day, no matter what position you have -- whether it's the lowest or the highest in the White House or in a department or agency -- we should be making sure that people who are coming in as appointees of the President support the President's agenda.  And I think that's one thing -- this isn't about getting a job as a federal employee where you're subject to certain restrictions as to what you can and can't do as a benefit of being a federal employee.  These are political appointees, and so I think that there is obviously -- we are going to ensure that people who are political appointees share the vision and agenda that the President campaigned on and is implementing.
Q    And does the White House believe that it needs to have the final approval of these people or can you trust your Cabinet Secretaries to --
MR. SPICER:  It's not a question of trust.  It's a question of just making sure that we're all on the same page and committed to the same agenda that the President has set forth.  This process is probably no different than we've seen in previous administrations.  Cabinet Secretaries come to the President with recommendations on who they want, and it depends on the position, obviously.  
But in certain cases, if they're going to fulfill a job that is a key area that the President had very specific goals to enact that he promised the American people, you want to make sure that the person that is fulfilling that job actually is committed to the agenda and the vision that the President set forth and promised the American people.  And that's -- so there is -- that's something that we're always going to be making sure is in alignment.
Q    And is this approval process in some way slowing down the appointment of crucial staffers?
MR. SPICER:  No.  No, not at all.  I don't think so.  I think when you look across where we are and we track the number of folks that are in the pipeline, we're doing very, very well with getting all of these positions filled.  And I think once in a while, you might hear of one or two people, but overall, generally speaking, I mentioned during the transition period how many members of the beachhead teams that we had, and I think we -- those members who are appointed through the beachhead process had 120 days.  And they were there to allow basically a four-month process for Secretaries in the White House to make sure that people on a permanent basis could populate those positions.  And that's what's happening.
But make no mistake -- I mean, we were ahead of the curve on the beachhead teams.  We were very clear with the landing teams during the transition.  This has been a very methodical process that has seen from top to bottom through, and I think we're doing a phenomenal job of staffing the government.
Margaret.
Q    Thank you.  Oh, which Margaret?
MR. SPICER:  Oh, lucky me.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Two Margarets.  I'm going to take mine -- I've got a Bloomberg-y question for you.  (Laughter.)  
MR. SPICER:  I've got a Sean-y answer for you.  (Laughter.)
Q    The President in the Roosevelt Room just said to us that, among other things, that the tax plan is nearly finalized but it can't be submitted until the healthcare plan statutorily or otherwise is, so we're doing the healthcare.  So what I wanted to clarify was, is the White House doing a healthcare proposal, or was he talking about Congress and not the White House?  Or is there a new plan?
MR. SPICER:  Well, obviously -- right.  So obviously there's two vehicles -- reconciliation vehicles that -- FY17 -- I'm going to give you a Bloomberg-y answer.  (Laughter.)  The FY17 reconciliation, that was never completed because the budget wasn't finalized in the last Congress.  And then you’ve got the 2018.  I think we want to make sure -- look at the opportunities to work with Congress on Obamacare, utilizing the 2017, and then you could utilize the 2018 reconciliation and budget process to do tax reform.
That’s not -- and again, that’s not prescriptive.  I’m not -- but as far as why the President is saying it that way is because we’ve got that option available to us right now, and I think the President is committed to making sure that the promise that he made to the American people to repeal and replace Obamacare continues to be first and foremost, and then his tax plan.
But it’s not a “we can walk and chew gum” kind of thing.  We can actually be continuting to work with Congress and the leadership in both Houses. 
Q    President Obama used to say that.  Just to do the Bloomberg-y timeline, there’s a few things that are going to happen then.  There’s going to be a budget plan that you guys are going to present on March 13th-ish.
MR. SPICER:  Ish.  (Laughter.)  
Q    There’s going to be a healthcare -- this is where I got lost again -- something from him and something from them, and a tax reform plan afterwards?  Is that the way it works?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t want -- look, when we’re ready to announce stuff -- but I think again, I think you’ve got Obamacare, the budget, and tax reform.  It’s going to be a very busy March and April for us.  And we’ve been continuing to work with Congress to make sure that that’s implemented.  
Noah Bierman.
Q    Does the President -- you were talking about fulfilling his promises.  As you know, he promised during the campaign a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the country.  There were a lot of people in his party who thought that was a very good proposal.  Can you explain his evolution in backing down from that?  And can you also say whether he regrets using that rhetoric, since it ended up hurting the court case?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, I’d go back to the merits of the case and the order that gives him the authority to make that.  U.S. Code 1182 is very clear.  The President was very clear in his executive order that these were countries that we didn’t have the proper vetting for when it came to ensuring the safety of Americans.
That’s what the executive order said.  The authority is very clear to have done it.  And I think that you’re going to continue to see the President take the steps necessary to protect this country.  That’s why he’s talked about fighting this on both fronts, making sure that we keep evolving through the court system on the existing EO, and then looking towards the next draft of the executive order that will continue to achieve the goal of protecting the American people.
So that’s where we are.  That’s what the order says.  And then so I think we continue to feel confident that that’s -- but it was crafted in a way that was very clear about the countries, and was not focused on anything else but the vetting requirements that we have to make sure that we know who’s coming into this country and that they’re here not to do us any harm.
Q    But when talking about fulfilling his promises, can you explain why he decided to back down from that one?  Because I know you differentiated this from that promise.
MR. SPICER:  I think he’s made it very clear, Noah, from the beginning that this was a country-focused issue, a safety-focused issue, and that’s why he issued it.  I don’t see anything other than that with reference to that.
Debra Saunders.
Q    Hi.  The Oscars are Sunday night.  Will the President be watching?  If there’s a Meryl Streep kind of moment, how do you think he’ll react?  And why -- if this has happened at other awards ceremonies, why do you think this happens?
MR. SPICER:  Why do I think what happens?  (Laughter.) 
Q    Actresses and actors like Meryl Streep. 
MR. SPICER:  I have no idea.  It’s a free country.  I think Hollywood is known for being rather far to the left in its opinions.  And I’ve got to be honest with you, I think the President will be hosting the Governors Ball that night.  Mrs. Trump looks forward to putting on a phenomenal event, and the First Lady has put a lot of time into this event that’s going to occur in welcoming our nation’s governors to the Capitol.  And I have a feeling that that’s where the President and the First Lady are going to be focused on on Sunday night, and so we’ll go from there.
Q    Sean, the President is going to have a big audience next Tuesday in the joint address to Congress.  Does he have a set of goals in mind for the speech?  And do you think we’re going to see some specific policy rollouts as part of that speech?
MR. SPICER:  I think that the speech is going to focus -- I mentioned this yesterday -- I think it’s going to talk -- remind the American people what he’s done already, and make sure that he explains to them not just because of a sense of accomplishment in moving this country forward, but because I think it’s important for the American people to know that he was an agent of change, he came here to get things done, and he didn’t waste any time.
He’s committed to keeping his word.  And then I think he’s going to lay out his vision and talk about things like education and healthcare and infrastructure, the problems that we face as a country, the violence in some of our inner cities, but also some of the solutions that we can act on and some of the partnerships that we can create.  It’s obviously still a work in progress.
But I think it’s going to look forward to where he wants to take this country and talk about working with Congress and other leaders throughout the country to get things done.  But I think in the drafts that I’ve seen so far, it is going to be a very strong blueprint of where he wants to take this country.  
In the past, I think a lot of presidents -- or some presidents, rather, have gotten into very detailed specifics.  I think you’re going to see him try to talk about policies in a broad sense of where he wants to take this country and what defining success is, what that goal means.  But it’s still a work in progress, and hopefully towards the end of the week --
Q    Is the tone going to be optimistic, sunny?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think this is an opportunity for him to lay out a very positive vision for the nation and to really let America know where we can go and how we can get there, and the potential that we have as a nation.
Anita.
Q    Just piggybacking on that, and then I have another question.  Will he -- I know past presidents, including President Obama, immediately hit the road after -- I know this isn’t a State of the Union, but something like a State of the Union address to sell policies.  And since you’re saying it’s more of a vision, does he anticipate doing -- going out --
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think there will be some travel.  I don't want to -- that's evolving right now.  There’s a lot of things that we're trying to look at.  And I think as we look at the speech and some of the objectives and goals and vision that he’s sharing, talk to him about potential places to go to highlight that.  But I think you're going to see a fair amount of visits in the next few weeks to highlight some of the places that he wants to take them.
Q    And then the other thing was, I've seen -- some members of Congress were here last week.  There’s the legislative meeting today.  It feels as if we haven’t seen as many executive actions -- or executive orders.  I know we have the one -- vetting one coming out this week.  Are we in a different phase now that he’s sort of done the executive orders that he wants to do --
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    -- and we're going to legislation?
MR. SPICER:  We have several that are in the pipeline.  And part of it is just -- these days are focused with these meetings and getting things done and trying to plan ahead.  And so as we see fit and as the implementation process of a lot of these goes through the process, we’ll have future -- we’ll have plenty more.  But -- 
Q    It does seem that there's more legislative emphasis right now.
MR. SPICER:  Well, it’s both.  And I think part of this is as we work through Congress, Anita, these are big things, right?  We're talking about fundamental tax reform -- something that hasn’t happened in our nation since 1986.  The repeal and replacement of Obamacare, which was mammoth.
And I think part of this is that those things take time.  He’s got a joint address on Tuesday.  There’s a lot of things that are happening, and therefore we need to kind of make sure that we appropriately use the schedule.  But I can assure you that if you've missed executive orders, you're going to see a bunch --  
Q    (Inaudible.) 
MR. SPICER:  (Laughter.)  I know.  I just want to make sure you know.
Jonathan Karl.
Q    I want to ask you about the town halls, and we're hearing about Obamacare.  The President referred to “so-called angry crowds” at these town halls.  Is he suggesting this is manufactured anger, that this is not real anger and real concern?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks.  I think there’s a hybrid there.  I think some people are clearly upset.  But there is a bit of professional protestor, manufactured base in there.  But obviously there are people that are upset.  But I also think that when you look at some of these districts and some of these things, that it is not a representation of a member’s district or -- it is a loud group, small group of people disrupting something, in many cases, for media attention.  No offense.
It’s just -- I think that necessarily -- just because they're loud doesn't necessarily mean that there are many.  And I think in a lot of cases that's what you're seeing.  
Q    Does the President doubt that there is real anger --
MR. SPICER:  No, I just said that.
Q    -- and real concern out there beyond just a few loud agitators, that there’s real concern that people may lose their healthcare?
MR. SPICER:  But see, I think that that's a false narrative.  And I don't -- the President has been very clear.  Look, you have to look at what our healthcare system is right now.  In so many counties around our nation, we've gone down to one provider.  That's not choice.  That's not access.  
And then they're going in a lot of cases and they're saying, we're not taking Medicaid, we're not taking TRICARE, we're not taking the insurance you used to have; the doctor that you used to have isn’t participating anymore.  And, oh, by the way, states like Arizona, you've got over 100 percent increase in premiums -- 112 [percent] I think was the number there.  In many states, it’s double, triple -- double-digit.  
And I think that the idea that we have to remember is that the American people got sold the Affordable Care Act -- it’s neither affordable or accessible.  They're losing their coverage and premiums are spiking.  And so if people are truly worried about losing their coverage, they should be applauding the President’s action for wanting to make sure that we put a system in place that does what they were supposed to have been promised a while back.  
And I think that's -- that's what I think is missing from this dialogue.  I’ve seen some folks that were protesting in some of these things saying, I lost -- I’m on Obamacare, I’m going to lose my thing.  And when they were asked how old they were, they were, oh, I’m 71, 72.  Well, they're not on Obamacare. -- they're on Medicaid.
Q    So you think you're making it up?
MR. SPICER:  No, not they're making it up.  But what I’m getting at it is I think that there is a lot of blurring of the facts.  And the reality is that some people aren’t on Obamacare.  They're on an employer-based system.  They're on Medicaid.  They're receiving their benefits through Medicare because of their age.  And so they're in -- nothing.  They have no problems. 
But I think in other cases, people are now being told that the plan that they're on is unsustainable; that these carriers throughout the country -- I mean, you just look at them, over and over again pulling out of the exchanges.  The reality is, is that they are losing their healthcare, but they're losing it under Obamacare because the exchanges are collapsing on themselves.  Carriers are pulling out.  Premiums are going up.  And access is going down.
So the President's plan is actually going to do exactly what they were promised eight years ago and didn't get.  So for those who are worried, the answer is:  Help is on the way.
Q    But what is the plan?  We haven't seen what he's going to replace it with.
MR. SPICER:  First, as the President made clear, we're going to have that out in the next couple weeks.  He's working on it.  But the goal, Jonathan, is this got jammed through a Democratic Congress, and then they told us you could read it after we get it passed.  So taking our time, getting this right to achieve the goals that we set forth is probably the right thing to do, considering the experience that we had the last time.
Hallie.
Q    Sean, two questions for you.  The issue of transgender bathrooms wasn't one we heard a lot about from the President during the campaign.  He said at one point, Caitlyn Jenner could use whichever bathroom she wanted to at Trump Tower.  So why is this now a priority for the administration 40 days into office?
MR. SPICER:  It's not a priority.  I think there's a case -- 
Q    But It's one of the first things --
MR. SPICER:  But let me answer the question.  It's not a priority.  There is a case pending in the Supreme Court in which we have to decide whether or not to continue to issue guidance to the Court.  It's dictated by that.
The Obama administration had issued joint guidance from the Department of Education and the Department of Justice.  We now have to decide whether or not this administration wants to continue that track that they were on.  It's plain and simple.  If we don't -- but there are problems, both in the legal and process way, in which that guidance was issued.  And so it's incumbent upon us to actually follow the law and to recognize that Title IX never talked about this.  It was enacted in 1972.  There was no discussion of this back then.  And to assume certain elements of the law were thought of back then with respect to this would be completely preposterous.
Q    And to be clear, Secretary DeVos is onboard with this?
MR. SPICER:  Yes, 100 percent.  Thank you.
Q    Sean, that was actually a clarification.  The second question is on Mexico.  The Secretary of State's trip that is tonight along with Secretary Kelly, obviously there have been tensions, right, between the Mexican President and President Trump.  Is this a clean-up job for the Secretary of State?
MR. SPICER:  No.  I think that President Peña Nieto and President Trump spoke -- again, the foreign ministers had several contacts with our staff.  I would argue that we have a very healthy and robust relationship with the Mexican government and Mexican officials, and I think they would echo that same sentiment.  President Peña Nieto has echoed that as well.
But I think the relationship with Mexico is phenomenal right now, and I think there's an unbelievable and robust dialogue between our two nations.
Margaret, and then I'll get you.
Q    On Syria, General Votel indicated today that the U.S. needs to take a larger share of the burden and perhaps send troops to Syria.  Has the President discussed this with his national security team?  And when does he --
MR. SPICER:  I'm going to refer you back to DOD on that.  I would just argue that I think that you've seen the President talk about safe harbors in Syria with several foreign leaders who have shared his -- 
Q    Safe havens.
MR. SPICER:  Safe havens, thank you.  And that is an area at the top of the President's foreign policy agenda that he has continued to talk to leaders, especially in the Middle east, about, trying to make sure that we deal with that issue in that area right now.  But I'm not going to get ahead of the DOD on this.  And then when they have recommendations, they'll make them forward to us.
Q    Is there an NSC -- has the President spoken to -- 
MR. SPICER:  Look, I will -- if I have an update, I'll give it to you tomorrow.
Go ahead.
Q    President Trump and the Canadian Prime Minister launched the U.S. and Canada Council for Advancement of Women Entrepreneurs.  Can you talk a little bit about how the council is growing and transpiring?  What's the status of it?
MR. SPICER:  I think staff is beginning to implement the President's agenda.  It occurred, what, six, seven days ago.  And so it's starting to work through the process and we'll have further updates as it goes forward.  But I know that he continues to be in touch with Prime Minister Trudeau, and our staff continues to work on the back end to make this happen.
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  I have two questions for you.  One, earlier in your conversation with Jon, does the White House not have confidence in its Cabinet Secretaries if it's looking sort of over their shoulders?  Does the White House not -- does the President not trust his Cabinet Secretaries, appointees and agency administrators to staff -- to find people who agree with the President's agenda?
MR. SPICER:  No, not at all.  I think there's a big difference.  The President named these folks because they're unbelievably qualified individuals.  Part of it, though, is that you're staffing major departments and I think we've got somewhere in the area of 5,000 positions to fill.  And when you're filtering through a good number of people, I don't even think the Secretaries, at some degree, depending on the department, have a full background on some of these individuals.
And so as they get pumped through the pipeline, there are questions.  And, again, there are areas that are of key priority to the President that he campaigned on.  And I think that when he wants to make sure that certain of those individuals who are going to be overseeing key priorities that he promised the American people have somebody who is not only qualified but agrees with and shares the President's vision to fix whatever problem that was or fulfill whatever vision that he articulated.
But I think that that -- I mean, it would almost be malpractice not to do that.  To allow people to fill a job, a political appointee job, who don't share the vision and agenda of the President of the United States would almost be -- I mean, it would be silly on its face to suggest this.
I don't think there's any administration in past history that would literally, willingly, take on somebody who was adamantly opposed or spoke out specifically against what the President was seeking to do, and then have them fulfill a job to carry out that mission.  It just -- it doesn't seem as though it makes any sense.
Yes.
Q    Second thing real quick.  We're coming up on a week away from the deadline the President ordered for his review of the counter-ISIS strategy.  What’s the status of that review?  The President tweeted over the weekend that he was meeting with a bunch of generals.
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    Is that regarding that review?
MR. SPICER:  I think General Dunford and Secretary Mattis have begun providing him updates on that.  I know that the new National Security Advisor is getting brought into that process and continuing to do updates, so we’ll have further updates.  But the team has been working on it since the President issued the guidance. 
Yes.
Q    As far as the second executive order is concerned, what is the White House doing differently in terms of consulting with various departments to make certain that this second executive order passes constitutional scrutiny?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think we've done a few things.  One is, I think we've been very clear about understanding what the court said in trying to tailor that specifically while achieving the same goals of keeping America safe and ensuring that people don't come into this country that seek to do us harm.  That's number one.
Number two is, we continue -- and that order is basically completed.  I think what we're now doing is working with the various agencies and departments to make sure that the implementation of that is done in an extremely smooth way.  So we have looked at it from both a process standpoint, as well as a legal standpoint.  And I think it’s achieving the goals.
But again, I would also mention that, on the merits, I believe that the first order did just that.  It was written in a way -- and I think ultimately we will continue to prevail on that -- because it is written in a way that is clear and consistent with U.S. code and the authority that the President has to protect the nation.
Katie.
Q    Sean --
Q    No matter what happens, as it relates to the second executive order, it’s almost likely to face a legal challenge.
MR. SPICER:  Sure. 
Q    Are you concerned that the President’s prior remarks as it relates to the judiciary is going to allow him to get a fair hearing by the judicial branch as it relates to the second executive order?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, absolutely.  I think that -- 
Q    Why do you say that?
MR. SPICER:  Because I think that you've seen it happen in the Massachusetts case.  I mean, at the end of the day, you look at the law and what the order does.  And I think, again, you may have -- in the case of the 9th Circuit, we continue to disagree with that.  I think the President has pointed out you don't have to be that high up in grade school to recognize what the code says, what the authority that is granted to him, and then what the order does.
I think the things that they brought out in that order -- in one of the cases, they suggested there have been no people that have entered within the seven countries.  And a quick cursory look found upwards of close to 20 people that had come in.  So some of the basis for which they decided the case on doesn't actually pass muster.  And I think any other judge or judges that look at that order or the one that will be put forward will come to the same conclusion.
Katie.
Q    Sean, I wanted to ask about the President’s budget priorities.  What specifically is the President increasing spending on?  Where is he decreasing spending?  And how much money specifically is he asking for the 5,000 new Border Patrol agents he’s asked for?
MR. SPICER:  So I’m going to refer you back to Margaret’s question, and then we’ll have something in mid-March as we put that out.  But I’m not going to get ahead of Director Mulvaney.
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. SPICER:  No, I mean, it’s not -- look, he just had a meeting where he’s continued to work that out.  They're providing him back-and-forth.  That's the idea of crafting this budget.  And until we put it out on paper, I don't want to get ahead of -- 
Q    Sean, can I follow up on Mexico?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    Thank you very much.  Back to Mexico -- Videgaray and many officials have said this morning that they're not going to accept the directives that were put out by the White House and by DHS yesterday, and they may not take anyone that's not a Mexican immigrant.  What are you guys doing to do with those people that Mexico will not accept?
MR. SPICER:  I think Secretary Tillerson and Secretary Kelly are going to have a great discussion down there, and to walk through the implementation of the executive order.  But I feel very confident that any country who has a citizen that comes into this country, and that we send back, we’ll make sure that they comply with this.
David.
Q    Two questions about immigration.  One, the President has talked a number of times about millions of illegal immigrants casting votes during the election, in his mind.  You guys have promised to look into that.  It seems like there was no mention of that in any of these directives, to look for these immigrants.  Does the President still believe this is a national security problem? 
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, and Vice President Pence will lead a task force on this.
Q    Where would we stand on that, though?
MR. SPICER:  He named a task force, and the Vice President is starting to gather names and individuals to be part of it.
Q    On the other question I had about the DACA program, yesterday you suggested, well, we have to go after hardened criminals and major national security threats first.  But during the campaign, the President talked about DACA as being an unconstitutional executive amnesty.  Does he still think it was an unconstitutional use of President Obama’s powers?  And if so, does he plan -- 
MR. SPICER:  I think -- yeah, I think -- and I said this yesterday:  The President is very clear about his priorities with respect to immigration.  Yesterday was focused on going after people who are a concern -- a public safety concern.  And we're going to walk through this very --
Q    -- unconstitutional?
MR. SPICER:  We will get back to you on that.  Right now the focus is on keeping the country safe and making sure that we walk through.
Shane.
Q    I want to ask on immigration, as well.  Given all of the push on deporting illegal immigrants, I wanted to see if this White House and President Trump have any interest in curtailing legal immigration going forward.
MR. SPICER:  Again, we got to look at this from a priority level.  Right now there’s millions of people in this country that are in the country illegally.  I think the focus continues to be that 800,000 or 900,000 that have already had an order to have them removed and get them processed through in a way that continues to keep America safe.
Legal immigration, obviously, is a completely separate subject, and that includes visa reform and all that other stuff.  The President has talked about that.  He’s talked about it with business leaders -- H-1B visas, et cetera.  You're going to see more of that coming.  But I think there is a prioritization of how we deal with immigration -- both illegal and then legal.  And we’ll have more on that later.
I got to run.  Thank you, guys, very much.  We’ll see you tomorrow.  Take care.
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 2/23/2017, #15
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
2:58 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  I was thinking about not doing a briefing today, and then I saw Reince Priebus and Steve Bannon give that talk and I thought they were infringing on my ratings, so we figured we had to do something to keep up our record.
It’s been another busy day today.  This morning, after receiving his daily intelligence briefing, the President welcomed some of the world’s top business and manufacturing leaders to the White House to continue the administration’s effort to engage with the private sector to create jobs and expand opportunities for America’s workers.  The 24 CEOs spent the morning in working sessions with the Vice President, Cabinet members and key aides, and came together with the President to brief him on their discussions and recommendations.
The group discussed the need to roll back burdensome regulations that are stifling economic growth.  The CEOs thanked the President for the actions that he’s already taken to address the issues, and the President pledged to do even more, both through the executive branch and by working with Congress to pass legislation that will help further economic growth and job creation.
The business leaders recommended that the administration take a multifaceted approach to tax and trade policies, including tax reform, toward which Secretary Mnuchin said that progress is continuing to be made.  The President committed to working to lower taxes and level the playing field with other countries when it comes to trade and taxation.
The group held a lengthy discussion about the need to invest in the American worker to prepare for the manufacturing jobs of the future, especially the key role of vocational schools in training the workforce of the 21st century.  The CEOs and administration officials agreed that public-private partnerships will be the cornerstone of a robust plan to rebuild the nation’s crumbling infrastructure.  The President committed to streamlining a permitting process that is holding back so many key projects.  
At the end of the discussion, the group expressed their excitement for having a true partner in economic growth in the White House, and Andrew Liveris, the CEO of Dow Chemical, even said that this is probably the most pro-business administration since the Founding Fathers.  The President conveyed his intention to assemble the industry leaders on a regular basis to discuss progress towards these important goals.  A full list of the participants is available.
This afternoon, the President spoke with Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau by phone.  We’ll have a readout on that call soon.  Right now, many of you just came from the President, who is involved in another listening session with leaders in the fight against domestic and international human trafficking, including representatives from International Justice Mission and United Way.  Their expertise will be invaluable to the President as he engages with members of Congress to raise awareness about, and push through, legislation aimed at preventing all forms of the horrific and unacceptable practice of the buying and selling of human lives.
Human trafficking is a dire problem, both domestically and internationally.  And solving this epidemic is a huge priority for the President.  Dedicated men and women from across the federal government have focused on this for some time, and the President is committed to continue working with these organizations and departments.  A participant list for this listening session is also going to be available.
The President this evening will attend a dinner with the Business Council.  
Today in Mexico, Secretaries Tillerson and Kelly had productive meetings at the Cabinet level with officials from the Mexican government.  They were forward-looking meetings focused on finding common-ground ways to advance both of our countries’ security and economic wellbeing.  Both sides had a candid discussion on the breadth of challenges and opportunities as part of the U.S.-Mexico relationship.
The conversation covered a full range of bilateral issues, including energy, legal migration, security, education exchanges, and people-to-people ties.  The parties also reiterated our joint commitment to maintaining law and order at our shared border by stopping potential terrorists and dismantling the transnational criminal networks that are moving drugs and people into the United States.
Under this President there is no mistaking that rule of law matters along both sides of our border.  Both Secretary Tillerson and Secretary Kelly are meeting with President Peña Nieto this afternoon.  That will be a continuation of the productive dialogue that is setting our two countries down a pathway to greater security and long-term prosperity.
Looking ahead to our upcoming schedule, tomorrow the President will welcome President of Peru for a working-level visit.  The President of Peru is in town for a separate visit and requested a meeting with the President.  There will be a spray at the top of that.  Further guidance will be provided later today.  The President will also speak at CPAC tomorrow.  I know the President is looking forward to addressing this group of conservative-committed individuals.
Our nation’s governors are starting to gather in Washington this week for a meeting of the National Governors Association.  The President and the First Lady will welcome the governors to the White House on Sunday evening.  The Vice President and members of the Cabinet will also be in attendance.  While the governors are in town, they will be meeting with members of the Cabinet, White House staff, and other Secretaries including Kelly, Price, and Secretary Chao have also set up a series of meetings.  
The President, Vice President, and senior White House staff will also participate in a portion of the business session of NGA’s winter meeting that takes place on Monday morning.
Next week, of course, the President will give a joint session address before both Houses of Congress.  He’s currently working closely with the speechwriting team on presenting his vision to Congress and the American people.  I’ve got a few updates that I want to just -- as we’re now a few days out.  The theme of the address will be the renewal of the American spirit.  The address will particularly focus on public safety, including defense, increased border security, taking care of our veterans, and then economic opportunity, including education, job training, healthcare reform, jobs, and tax and regulatory reform.
With that, I’d be glad to take a few of your questions.  
Q    Two questions.  First, the White House said previously that that travel ban was pushed quickly out of necessity for national security, and now we’re hearing there’s these repeated delays while the new one is being drafted.  How do we reconcile those two talking points?  That’s question one.
And then secondly, the President said today that the deportations taking place under his watch are a military operation.  Secretary Kelly said the military won’t be involved in deportations.  Did the President misspeak?
MR. SPICER:  So I’ll take the latter first.  The President was using that as an adjective.  It’s happening with precision, and in a manner in which it’s being done very, very clearly.  
I think we’ve made it clear in the past, and Secretary Kelly reiterated it, what kind of operation this was.  But the President was clearly describing the manner in which this was being done.  And so just to be clear on his use of that phrase.  And I think the way it’s being done, by all accounts, is being done with very much a high degree of precision and a flawless manner in terms of making sure that the orders are carried out, and it’s done in a very streamlined and efficient manner.
I’m sorry, the first part was?
Q    The first one was about the travel ban.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.  And I think, look, we have made it very clear that we believe that the first one was done in compliance with U.S. code and the authority granted to the President.  This time, the order is finalized.  What we are doing is now in the implementation phase of working with the respective departments and agencies to make sure that when we execute this, it’s done in a manner that’s flawless.
And so it’s not a question of delaying, it’s a question of getting it right.  We’ve taken the Court’s opinions and concerns into consideration, but the order is finalized.  It’s now awaiting implementation.  What we want to do is make sure that we’re working through the departments and agencies so that any concerns or questions are handled on the front end.  But we are acting with appropriate haste and diligence to make sure that the order is done in an appropriate manner.
Q    I want to ask you about a comment that the Treasury Secretary made today.  He was asked if we should assume that the tax plan that the President is about to roll out will take effect in 2018.  He said, and I’m quoting, “I think we’re looking at that.”  So my question to you is, would the President accept a tax proposal that deals with the timeline of implementation in 2018 but not 2017?
MR. SPICER:  So, Secretary Mnuchin also made it very clear that his goal is to have this wrapped up by August and implemented.  The question is, or what you’re referring to is what year it actually takes place?
Q    Right.
MR. SPICER:  Right, so whether it’s retroactive to tax year 2017 or fiscal year '17.  And I think as the details get -- 
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, we’ll have more details on that as it moves forward.  I think there’s two issues -- fiscal year '17 and calendar year '17.  And, for taxpayers, it’s obviously calendar year 2017 that they’re probably most concerned with, and I think the President, as we work with Congress, will have those details to be able to flush out.
I want to go to our first Skype seat of the day.  Neil Vigdor with Hearst Connecticut Media Group.
Q    Good afternoon, Sean.  Thanks for taking my question.  I appreciate it.  Connecticut’s governor directed police chiefs across the state Wednesday to avoid taking any special action against undocumented immigrants, including honoring immigration detainer requests from ICE.  What will the repercussions be for this state in terms of federal funding it receives from the Trump administration?
And secondly, does the President’s executive order on sanctuary cities apply to those that are undeclared sanctuary cities?
MR. SPICER:  Well, Neil, I think there’s a couple things.  The idea that Governor Malloy would not want the law followed as enacted by Congress or by the Connecticut legislature in any fashion seems to be concerning, right?  Whether you’re a governor or mayor or the President, laws are passed in this country and we expect people and our lawmakers and our law enforcement agencies to follow and adhere to the laws as passed by the appropriate level of government.
So it’s obviously concerning, I think, and it’s troubling that that’s the message that he would send to his people and to other governors.  Because we are a nation of laws, and I think that people need to understand that whether it’s the laws that he passes as the Governor of Connecticut or the laws that are passed through Congress and signed by the President, there’s a reason that our democracy works.  It’s because the people speak, our representatives at every level pass a law, and the executive in that particular branch of government signs or vetoes it, and then we live by those rules.  And the idea that you can decide which laws to agree or not to agree with, or follow or not follow, undermines our entire rule of law.
And so I would suggest that that is not a great sign to be sending to the people of Connecticut and the people of this country, that a particular governor chooses not to follow the duly-passed laws of this nation.  
With respect to sanctuary cities, I think this is an area that the American people by huge amounts support.  They recognize their tax dollars shouldn’t be spent supporting programs and activities to which people are not entitled to.  And so I think the President has been very clear on this -- that if you are a sanctuary city, declared or undeclared, if you are providing benefits or services, we are going to do everything we can to respect taxpayers and ensure that your states follow the law.
April.
Q    Sean, on the bathroom issue, there was a different comment from the President about, you know, if people like Caitlyn Jenner wanted to use this bathroom in Trump Tower, she could now.  What’s happened?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think that’s -- so just to be clear, the President was asked -- at one point Caitlyn Jenner was in Trump Tower, and he said, that’s great.  That’s consistent with everything he’s said.  It’s a states' rights issue.  And that’s entirely what he believes -- that if a state wants to pass a law or rule, or an organization wants to do something in compliance with the state rule, that’s their right.  But it shouldn’t be the federal government getting in the way of this.  
I mean, if you look at this, the law that was passed in 1972 did not contemplate or consider this issue.  Number two, the procedure for this guidance letter that was done through the Obama administration was not properly followed.  There was no comment period.  There was no input from parents, teachers, students or administrators.  None.  
So if we think about how this was implemented last administration, there was zero input, there was zero comment period offered.  Teachers and students never had any say in how this was implemented.  Number three, there’s a reason that the Texas court had this matter enjoined.  It’s because it didn’t follow the law and it had procedural problems.
Four, as I mentioned, it’s a states' rights issue.  And then five is, I think that we do have to recognize that children do enjoy rights, from anti-bullying statutes that are in almost every state, and that there’s a difference between being compassionate for individuals and children who are struggling with something and wanting to make sure they’re protected, and how it’s being done.  And I think that the President has a big heart, as we’ve talked about in a lot of other issues, and there’s a big difference.  Personally, he addressed this issue when it came up with respect to one of his properties.
But he also believes that that’s not a federal government issue.  It’s an issue left to the states, and it’s an issue that -- I mean, there’s a reason in August of last year that the court enjoined this, because it hadn’t followed the law and it hadn’t -- the procedure, the comment period and the solicitation of opinions and ideas wasn’t followed.  It was jammed down the process.
And so we’re actually following the law on this one, and I think that’s the way it’s supposed to be done.
John.
Q    If I could just follow on what April said.  The Human Rights Campaign -- 
Q    I wasn’t finished, I’m sorry.  
Q    Well, I’m following on your question.  Let me follow --
Q    I understand that, but --
MR. SPICER:  Why don’t we let April follow on and then we’ll get to John, Kristen and Brian. 
Q    Yeah.  So I have one on -- I have something on another issue really fast, then John can do that.  On the HBCU executive order, we understand the executive order that’s coming out sometime later this month, it’s supposed to open -- you’re working out issues of opening an office specifically to take the HBCU initiative out of the Department of Education and bring it directly under the purview of the White House.  Who will be heading that?  Have you figured that out?  Have you also figured out how you will build that office out?  Because from what I understand, that is one of the big pieces of this.
MR. SPICER:  Well, respectfully, that’s why it hasn’t been issued yet.  We’re working it through the process.  Obviously, that is something that we’re committed to getting done by the end of Black History Month.  So our days are numbered, but there’s a commitment by the President and the staff to really focus on this issue and give it the proper respect that it deserves.  So if you’ll bear with us a couple more days, I promise you we’ll have more to say on that.
Q    So it will be a department with the full -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, I just want to be clear, I’m not going to get into the details.  Sort of my blanket statement on non-issued executive orders.  But I do know that there is a commitment by the President and the staff that he has been very clear with us that he wants that done by the end of this month for obvious reasons.
Now John.
Q    Let me get back to where we were.  The Human Rights Campaign, in responding to rescinding the guidance last night, said that this is not a states' rights issue, it’s a civil rights issue, and therefore is in the purview of the federal government.  Do you disagree that this a civil rights issue?
MR. SPICER:  It’s not a -- it’s a question of where it’s appropriately addressed.  And I think there’s a reason -- like, we’ve got to remember, this guidance was enjoined last August by a court.  It hasn’t been enforced.  There was no comment period by anyone -- by the Human Rights Campaign, by teachers, parents, students.  Nobody had any input of this.
And it seems to me a little interesting that if this was any other issue, people would be crying foul that the process wasn’t followed.  The reality is, is that when you look at Title IX, it was enacted in 1972.  The idea that this was even contemplated at that is preposterous on its face.  But that doesn’t mean that the President -- the President obviously understands the issue and the challenges that especially young children face.  He just believes that this is a state issue that needs to be addressed by states, as he does with a lot of other issues that we’ve talked about.
And so this is -- we are a states' rights party.  The President on a lot of issues believes in these various issues being states' rights.  I don’t see why this would be any different.  And again, if you go through it, it’s not just -- it’s how the guidance was issued, it’s the legal basis on which it was ordered.  It fell short on a lot of stuff.
It wasn’t us that did this; it was the court that stepped in and said that they hadn’t followed the procedure of the law back in August of last year and enjoin the case.
Q    I understand all that, I’m just wondering if -- does the White House disagree with the position that this is a civil right?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think it’s not a question of whether it’s a civil right, it’s where is it appropriately addressed.  And as I noted, it’s appropriately addressed at the state level.
Kelly.
Q    Can I follow on that?  Sean, does the President believe, personally believe that any student who is transgender should be able to use the bathroom of their choice?  His personal belief?
MR. SPICER:  The President believes it’s a states' rights issue.  And he’s not going to get into determining -- I understand what you’re asking, Kelly.  And I think that, as April pointed out, when the issue came to one of his own properties he was very clear.  But again, what he doesn’t want to do is force his issues or beliefs down -- he believes it’s a states' rights issue --
Q    But the public may want to know where the President is on this issue.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, and I think that he is very sympathetic to children who deal with that and that this is up to states and schools within a particular district to address how they want to accommodate that, and not sort of be prescriptive from Washington.  That’s what the President believes.
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  You mentioned that this order was enjoined by a court and there was criticism about the process.  That exact same criticism has been levied on the administration’s first executive order, on the travel ban.  I mean, can you help us square the circle here?  Why are you relying on that same “enjoined by a federal court” criticism of the process for one but not the other?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think there’s a big difference.  There’s no way that you can read Title IX from 1972 -- anybody -- and say that that was even contemplated back then.  It just -- there’s nobody that is possibly suggesting that the law that was passed in 1972 did that.
Number two, there was zero comment period put forward on this guidance, which is in violation of how it was executed, okay?  And so there’s a big difference -- hold on, hold, on let me answer the question, Zeke.  There is also a strong reading when you read 1182 U.S. Code that it is very clear that the President does have the authority.
So they are very much apples and oranges issue.  One, it’s very clear that the President is told by Congress in U.S. code that he has the authority to do what’s necessary to protect the American people.  And there’s no way that anybody above a fifth grade reading level could interpret that different.  There is a difference between looking at a statute from 1972 and saying that something was complicated back then.  
Not only that -- again, it’s a multifaceted thing.  When you look at how the guidance was issued, there was a zero comment period.  Nobody was able to weigh in on that situation back then.  And so when you’re talking about forcing schools to make a huge accommodation from the federal level, and schools, parents, teachers, kids were not able to have any input in that decision from Washington, I think it’s a very, very clear difference.  
John Gizzi.  
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Just going back two weeks, in a story that got relatively little attention at the time -- Chuck Cooper, a very distinguished lawyer, asked that his name be withdrawn when he was on the periphery of being named U.S. Solicitor General.  So my question is a two-parter.  First, can you confirm or deny the administration is now vetting Mr. Miguel Estrada, who was a former nominee for the Court of Appeals, as Solicitor General before the visa delay case gets to the Supreme Court?
And second, Mr. Cooper said that he did not want to go through the same experience that Jeff Sessions, his good friend, did when he had the confirmation hearings and the vote in the Senate.  Does that make the President a little bit discouraged about getting the nominees he wants for some very important positions?
MR. SPICER:  Well, thanks, John.  And I’d say - on the first part, as you know -- and I’ll give you the same answer we give executive orders -- we don’t comment on personnel decisions until they’re made, until they’re finalized.  So I’ve got nothing for that.
On the second part, what I would say is that the President is very confident we have a deep bench of folks who -- during the transition, we talked about this -- a number of people who have expressed a huge interest in joining the President in fulfilling this agenda.  And that list is robust and long.
However, that being said, I think for folks who have to go through the Senate confirmation and to watch what has happened to some of these fine individuals -- the delay tactics, the tearing apart of their personal lives -- it is discouraging for some of these people, I think, in terms of Mr. Cooper and others who are looking at the process saying, I would like to be part of this administration, help fulfill this vision and this agenda, but this is what I’m going to have go through.
So while this is somewhat of an isolated case, I definitely understand what he’s talking about here.  And I think those are few and far between, but I think that when you realize what is happening largely at the expense of Senate Democrats, in terms of dragging these people through a very, very delayed and arduous process for purely political points, I think that there are some people who could look at the process and potentially say I don't want to serve.
Luckily, we've not come to that beyond a handful of folks.  Largely, people have huge desire and are willing to make great sacrifice -- both financially and personally -- to serve in the administration because I think they understand what potential change this President is bringing to this country and to the city.  But I understand his point.
Q    This morning, the President talked about, as he often does when he talks about immigrants, he talks about really bad dudes.  
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.
Q    You talked about precision.  The Homeland Security Secretary this morning insisted there won’t be mass deportation. 
MR. SPICER:  Right. 
Q    Is it the President’s intent or desire, as some advocates worry, that people who are here illegally with something as simple as a traffic violation, that those people will be subject to deportation?  Yes or no?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think everybody who is in this country for obvious reasons -- if you overstay a visa, if you commit a crime, you can't -- by the very nature of you not being legal, you can be subject to deportation.  That's by definition.  Being in this country is a privilege, not a right, if you are a visitor.  And I think we have a right to make sure that the people who are in this country are here for good and peaceful processes.  
And as I’ve said over and over again, there is a big difference.  The President recognizes that there are millions of people in the country who are not here legally, and that we have to have a very systematic and pragmatic and methodical process of going through those individuals to make sure that the people who pose a threat to public safety or have a criminal record are the first that are gone.
What we've done -- just to be clear -- is to untie the hands of ICE and Border Patrol agents and say, your job is to enforce the law -- first and foremost to figure out who poses a threat to us.  But in the previous administration their hands had been tied.  There was exception after exception after exception.  And the fact of the matter is, is that we have to -- we are a nation of laws, and we have to have a system of legal immigration that is respected.
So I’m not going to be prescriptive in terms of what ICE’s job is.  But needless to say, their job and their mission is to protect the country and to enforce our borders and our immigration laws.  And the President has basically instructed them to carry out their mission.  And so the priorities, as we've discussed over and over and over again, is to do that is in accordance with the law but also prioritizes those people that pose a threat.
I’m going to go to Roby Brock from the Talk Business & Politics in -- where is he from?  Arkansas.  
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Roby Brock with Talk Business & Politics here in Arkansas, the home of the rowdiest town halls in the nation.  
I have a question on medical marijuana.  Our state voters passed a medical marijuana amendment in November.  Now we're in conflict with federal law, as many other states are.  The Obama administration kind of chose not to strictly enforce those federal marijuana laws.  My question to you is:  With Jeff Sessions over at the Department of Justice as AG, what’s going to be the Trump administration’s position on marijuana legalization where it’s in a state-federal conflict like this?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Roby.  There’s two distinct issues here: medical marijuana and recreational marijuana.  
I think medical marijuana, I’ve said before that the President understands the pain and suffering that many people go through who are facing especially terminal diseases and the comfort that some of these drugs, including medical marijuana, can bring to them.  And that's one that Congress, through a rider in 2011 -- looking for a little help -- I think put in an appropriations bill saying the Department of Justice wouldn’t be funded to go after those folks.  
There is a big difference between that and recreational marijuana.  And I think that when you see something like the opioid addiction crisis blossoming in so many states around this country, the last thing that we should be doing is encouraging people.  There is still a federal law that we need to abide by in terms of the medical -- when it comes to recreational marijuana and other drugs of that nature.  
So I think there’s a big difference between medical marijuana, which states have a -- the states where it’s allowed, in accordance with the appropriations rider, have set forth a process to administer and regulate that usage, versus recreational marijuana.  That’s a very, very different subject.
Shannon.
Q    What does that mean in terms of policy?  A follow-up, Sean.  What does that mean in terms of policy?
MR. SPICER:  Shannon.  Glenn, this isn’t a TV program.  We’re going to --
Q    What is the Justice Department going to do?
MR. SPICER:  Okay, you don’t get to just yell out questions.  We’re going to raise our hands like big boys and girls.
Q    Why don’t you answer the question, though?
MR. SPICER:  Because it’s not your job to just yell out questions.  
Shannon, please go.
Q    Okay.  Well, first, on the manufacturing summit, was the AFL-CIO invited?  And then, yeah, I did want to follow up on this medical marijuana question.  So is the federal government then going to take some sort of action around this recreational marijuana in some of these states?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that’s a question for the Department of Justice.  I do believe that you’ll see greater enforcement of it.  Because again, there’s a big difference between the medical use which Congress has, through an appropriations rider in 2014, made very clear what their intent was in terms of how the Department of Justice would handle that issue.  That’s very different than the recreational use, which is something the Department of Justice I think will be further looking into.  
I’m sorry, Shannon, what was the first part?
Q    Was the AFL-CIO invited to the manufacturing meeting today with the CFOs?  Because they are part of this manufacturing --
MR. SPICER:  Right.  I think this was just focused on people who actually -- they were not, I don’t believe, part of this one.  As you know, that we’ve had union representation at other meetings.  I think this was specifically for people who are hiring people and the impediments that they’re having to create additional jobs, hire more people.  And obviously, while the President values their opinion -- and that’s why they’ve been involved in some of the past -- this was specifically a manufacturing -- people who hire people, who manufacture, who grow the economy, who grow jobs.  And that is a vastly different situation.
Andrei.
Q    I specifically sat here next to John to have --
MR. SPICER:  One can see --
Q    You know me.  (Laughter.)  Thank you.  A question on Russia.  Secretary Tillerson and General Dunford have had meetings with their Russian counterparts.  Is the President pleased with the results of the meetings?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    And what comes next?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, both of them had an opportunity to meet with their counterparts in different locations, ironically on the same day.  I believe that was yesterday.  And they both had very, very productive discussions.  The President was very pleased with the outcome of that, and so I would refer you back to both General Dunford and Secretary Tillerson on those.  
Q    You started discussing the where and when for the summit for the leaders meeting?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t have any updates on that, but I’ll look into that.  
Cecilia.
Q    Sean, I just want to follow up.  I want to clarify, make sure I understand what you said.  You said, you will see greater enforcement of it? 
MR. SPICER:  I would refer you to the Department of Justice --
Q    But you said, you said there will be greater enforcement.
MR. SPICER:  No, no.  I know.  I know what I -- I think -- then that’s what I said.  But I think the Department of Justice is the lead on that.  It is something that you should follow up with them, but I believe that they are going to continue to enforce the laws on the books with respect to recreational marijuana versus --
Q    Okay.  And my real question if you don’t mind.
MR. SPICER:  That first one was pretty real.
Q    Ivanka Trump was in the White House today for a meeting on human trafficking.  She had this meeting on CEOs.  We saw her in a smaller session here at the White House today.  What exactly is her role here?
MR. SPICER:  I think her role is to be helpful and provide input on a variety of areas that she has deep, passionate concerns about, especially in the area of women in the workforce and empowering women.  She is someone who has a lot of expertise and wants to offer that, especially in the area of trying to help women.  She understands that firsthand.  And I think because of the success that she’s had, her goal is to try to figure out -- and the understanding that she has a businesswoman -- to use her expertise and understanding to empower and help women have the same kind of opportunity and success that she’s had.  So -- 
Q    But still not a formal role?
MR. SPICER:  No, nothing more than you’ve seen now.  I think, last night, the meeting that she had in Baltimore was one that was done on her own.  There’s areas that she’s cared very passionately about before her time in the White House, or before her father coming to the White House, rather.  And now that her father is in the White House, she continues to seek a platform that helps empower and lift up women, and give them opportunities and think of ways that they can be --
Q    Sean, thanks.  On the human trafficking meeting today, the President said, well, when you talk about solving this kind of problem, that’s a nice word, but it’s really -- he suggested that, more likely, he could just help out on that problem.  What’s his definition of success in this?  What’s his goal?  Is he looking at stronger criminal penalties?
MR. SPICER:  Well, Dave, I think that’s, as I read out earlier, that the President understands that this is a serious problem both for adults, but particularly for children who are being sold both domestically and internationally, and it’s why we brought these groups in.  It’s to make sure that we figure out how do we make that number as close to zero as possible and that we institute policies both domestically, but then abroad, and working with our partners to figure out how do we combat the trafficking of people.  
So it’s things that we can be forceful in terms of the rhetoric that the President uses, but also the enforcement tools that he uses both domestically and internationally.
Trey.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Has the President been briefed at all on the situation at Standing Rock?  And is he concerned that a stand-off with protesters could slow down his executive orders on pipelines?
MR. SPICER:  Our team has been involved with both the tribe and the governor there, and so we are not only -- we are constantly in touch with them.  And I think we feel very confident that we will move forward to get the pipeline moving.  And so we’ll have a further update on that, but I think we're in constant contact with the officials there. 
Kristen.
Q    Sean, thank you.  Two topics I’d like to ask, but I wanted to start off by following on the transgender directive.  Eight-two percent of transgender children report feeling unsafe at school.  So isn’t the President leaving some of these children open to vulnerable -- to being bullied at school?
MR. SPICER:  No.  I mean, there are bullying laws and policies in place in almost every one of these schools.
Q    Transgender children say their experience is -- 
MR. SPICER:  But I don't think -- hold on --
Q    -- not being able to use the bathroom that they feel comfortable using because of vulnerability to bullying.
MR. SPICER:  But again, you're missing the point here, Kristen.  The President said literally it should be a state decision.  He respects the decision of the state.  So therefore -- 
Q    So respecting kids is a states’ rights issue?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, that's not -- you're trying to make an issue out of something that doesn't exist.  It was the court who stopped this in August of last year.  So where were the questions last year in August about this?  It wasn’t implemented correctly, legally, and the procedure wasn’t followed because the court found, at the time, that it didn't have the authority to do that.  So you’re asking us why we're following the law that wasn’t followed.  And the reality is --
Q    Well, I'm asking you why you're reversing the Obama directive -- 
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  No, no, we're not reversing it.  Hold on.  We're not reversing it.  That is a misinterpretation of the scenario.  The court stopped it.  It enjoined it in August of last year because it wasn’t properly drafted, and it didn't follow the procedures, and there was no legal basis for it in a law that was instituted in 1972. 
So hold on -- for you to use those terms, frankly, doesn't reflect what the situation actually is and how it happened.  That's just -- so to talk about us reversing something that was stopped by the courts.
Q    I understand that --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, but -- 
Q    -- but you're sending a message --
MR. SPICER:  No, we're not.  We're basically saying that it’s a states’ rights issue.  If a state choses to do it, as I mentioned to April, when this circumstance came up at one of the President’s own properties, he was very clear about his position on this.  So for you to turn around and say what message is the President saying, where was the message when he sent it last year?  I think the message shows that he’s a guy with a heart that understands the trouble that many people go through.
But he also believes that the proper legal recourse for this is with the states.  He believes in the states’ ability to determine what’s right for their state versus another state.  
Q    I understand what you're saying.  But the LGBTQ community yesterday said they felt -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand what -- 
Q    -- that what they perceiving is that those kids are not being respected.   
MR. SPICER:  But there’s a difference what people may or may not feel and the legal process and the law.  And the law right now doesn't allow for it under Title IX that was passed in 1972.  And the procedure wasn’t followed.  The court saw this in August of last year for a reason.  And all we're doing is saying that the proper place for this is in the states.
And so for you to suggest what message is this sending, it’s very simple:  that it’s a states’ rights issue, and the states should enact laws that reflect the values, principles, and will of the people in their particular state.  That's it, plain and simple.
Q    Moving on to Obamacare very quickly, former House Speaker John Boehner predicted that a full repeal and replace of Obamacare -- his words -- “is not going to happen.”  He went on to say, “Most of the framework of the Affordable Care Act, it’s going to be there.”  Do you think that he has a point?  Are you going to --
MR. SPICER:  Well, no, I think -- look, I think what we're going to end up with is something that I’ve talked about over and over again.  We're going to end up with a more accessible plan that will allow people to see more doctors, have more providers, and drive costs down.  Those are the two guiding principles that we're going to have in what the President is going to work with Congress to put forward on.  That's it, plain and simple.
Yes.
Q    Sean, on roads and highways in the United States, in many places around the country potholes and other issues are affecting the way in which Americans travel.  And the President has said he would fix these issues during the campaign.  What is the status on that?  And has the President spoken to heads of DOT or other people? 
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the President is starting to address that through the budget process we talked about yesterday.  It will be out in mid-March.  And so the infrastructure projects and priorities that the President has talked about -- whether it’s air control, and our airports, or the roads and bridges -- will be something that he’s going to work with DOT, but also talk about in his budget.  And you’ll see more in his joint address to Congress. 
With that, Laurel Staples of KECI-NBC in Montana.
Q    Montana has hundreds of miles of border with Canada.  And according to the U.S. Department of Transportation, almost 1 million people come across that border into Montana each year.  What are the administration’s plans to increase security on the Canadian border?  And does the administration have any plans to build a wall there?  (Laughter.)  
MR. SPICER:  Well, we're obviously concerned -- thank you -- at all sorts of immigration in this country, whether it’s from our northern border or our southern border.  I think the President understands that our southern border is where we have more of a concern in terms of the number of people and the type of activity that's coming over there in terms of the cartels and drug activity.  But that doesn't mean that we're not paying attention to our northern border, as well.  And we will continue to both monitor and take steps necessary at our northern border to ensure the safety of all Americans.
Yes, sir.
Q    One question on the South China Sea and a follow-up on the Dakota Access Pipeline.
This week was the first week, I believe, that the Trump administration launched freedom of navigation operations in the South China Sea.  Can you give us a sense of how frequently you are going to be doing those?
And then on the Dakota Access Pipeline, a few weeks ago President Trump said he would try to negotiate a solution between the Standing Rock Sioux and Energy Transfer Partners.  Why hasn’t the President intervened and tried to initiate those negotiations yet?
MR. SPICER:  So on the latter, our team has been in contact with all the parties involved.  They have been working and communicating back and forth.  So if we have an update on that -- but there has been work at the staff level between the parties.
And then on the second -- on the first part, I’ve got no further update in terms of the frequency by which we will have stuff.
Alexis.
Q    Sean, in the Reuters interview with the President, he described again his interest in seeing the nuclear arsenal expand in the United States.  Can you describe what it is that the President has in mind -- the timeframe and how he would like to pursue that?
MR. SPICER:  Yes, let’s just be clear.  He didn't -- what he was very clear on is that the United States will not yield its supremacy in this area to anybody.  That's what he made very clear in there.  And that if other countries have nuclear capabilities, it will always be the United States that has the supremacy and commitment to this.
Obviously, that's not what we're seeking to do.  The question that was asked was about other people growing their stockpiles.  And I think what he has been clear on is that our goal is to make sure that we maintain America’s dominance around the world, and that if other countries cloud it, we don't sit back and allow them to grow theirs.
Francesca.
Q    Sean, a domestic policy question and then a foreign policy question, if you will.  You said yesterday that the President had named a task force on the voter fraud probe.  When did he name that task force specifically? 
MR. SPICER:  I think two weeks ago he announced that Vice President Pence would lead that task force, and that the Vice President and his team were starting to look at members to do that.
Q    So you were referring to the interview in which he said there would be a task force.
MR. SPICER:  That's right. 
Q    Not that something has happened since then.
MR. SPICER:  That's correct. 
Q    Okay.  And then on foreign policy, the President had said in his Saturday campaign speech that the Gulf States would be paying for that safe zone in Syria.  Which Gulf States was he referring to?  Have any committed to paying for that?
MR. SPICER:  So if you look at the readouts that he’s had with several of the foreign leaders that is brought up and mentioned in almost every one of them.  And I think he’s talked about the financing of the safe zones and the commitment that they need to make to those.  And I think by and large, we've had widespread commitment.  When we have an update on -- and I think that's an issue that's going to be ongoing at the Secretary of State level, as well, where you saw Secretary Tillerson follow up on that with numerous folks.
We will have further updates on the funding of safe zones as we go forward.  But there has been a general commitment by most of these heads of government to share in the President’s commitment to help fund these things.
Can I go to Steve Gruber of WJIM in Michigan?
Q    Thank you, Sean.  I greatly appreciate it.  I’d like to talk to you more about tax policy, if I may.  President Trump, of course, on the campaign trail talked a lot about tax policy and tax reform.  That hasn’t happened yet, as we know.  But I want to talk about something different.  That's the border adjustability tax.  With the manufacturers that were at the White House again today, states like Michigan, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, others have a great concern about this tax, and there seems to be a disconnect between some of the CEOs, some of the Republicans on Capitol Hill and the President as to whether or not this is appropriate.  
And I guess the question is:  Could this tax have a chilling effect on manufacturing at a time when places like Ohio, and Michigan, and the Upper Midwest are trying to jumpstart the economy with manufacturing jobs?  I wish for you to clarify, if you could, the President’s position.
MR. SPICER:  Yes, Steve, thank you.  I think the President has been very clear from the beginning that there is no tax if companies manufacture in the United States.  We are one of only a handful of countries that doesn't tax the imports that come into our country.  Almost every other country operates their tax code under that system.
And so what happens is we have a system by which companies abroad can send their products -- tax our products going into their country and institute an import tax, and then their products come into the United States with no import tax -- which, frankly, gives a disincentive to companies to stay in the United States, to manufacture in the United States, to hire in the United States.  And it tilts the field against the American worker.
And so the President is looking at tax policy that encourages manufacturing and job creation in the United States.  And if you think about it -- 
Q    So where is he on this border adjustability tax?  
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.
Q    Where is he on this tax specifically? 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And I think that what he is doing is he met yesterday with his team on the budget.  He’s talked to Secretary Mnuchin and others who are working on a comprehensive tax reform plan.  And remember, Steve, this isn’t something that's been done since 1986.  And so as we look at it, part of that is to make sure that we lower our corporate tax rate, that we make it more attractive to manufacture and grow jobs in the United States, to make our companies more competitive with companies overseas that, frankly, have better tax treatment than our own companies who stay in the United States.  So creating more of a playing field that encourages manufacturing and growing and creating in the United States.  
But make no mistake, if a company is in the United States already and expanding in the United States, it will be only to their benefit.  Actually, if you think about it right now, the way the current tax code works, it almost incentivizes companies from leaving the United States, manufacturing, and expanding overseas, and then sending their goods and services back to the United States, which undermines our own economy, it undermines our workers.
Q    But the question is about components coming back in the United States being manufactured.
MR. SPICER:  I understand, Steve.  Okay, I know that you're on the Skype, but we only do like one or two follow-ups.  
But the answer is, is that he’s working towards comprehensive tax reform, and we’ll have a plan out within the next few weeks that will address that.
Yes.
Q    On the transgender guidance, the administration not only rescinded it, but sent a letter to the Supreme Court informing them about the change as they consider a related case.  Does the termination of the guidance present an administration position on the way the Supreme Court should rule?
MR. SPICER:  I’m sorry, on?  Well, obviously, we’re -- I’m sorry -- removing the guidance clearly does.  The guidance that was put forward by the Obama administration, which clearly hadn’t been done in a proper way in terms of how they solicited, or, rather, didn’t solicit comments -- the guidance it puts forward obviously sends a signal to the Court on where the administration stands on this issue.
Q    Can I ask you about Syria?  Two quick questions.  First, the talks have started again, peace talks in Geneva.  The man convening them, Staffan de Mistura, says he’s not detected a clear strategy on the political track from the administration.  So what is the President’s thinking on that?  And in particular, what’s his thinking on the future of President Assad, whether he can stay on in a transition or -- 
MR. SPICER:  I will refer you to the State Department on the status of the talks.
Q    But the overall strategy comes from here.  
MR. SPICER:  Right, I understand that.  And that’s one of the things that the President, whether it’s safe zones or how we deal with Syria and the problems that --
Q    What's the President thinking on Assad’s future?  Just the key points.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, thank you.
Q    One other question then on Syria, if you don’t mind.  The fall of al-Bab in northern Syria, an important development on the battlefield, creates some space in that town that’s fallen to the Turks and opposition.  Is that the sort of space that the President would like to see a safe zone?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- we’re not trying to be prescriptive right now in terms of the geographic location of a safe zone.  It’s something that -- right now, the President’s goal is to get commitments from other world leaders, both in terms of the funding and the commitment to share in how we do that.
So I don’t want to get -- we’re not looking to be prescriptive today in how it’s done.  I think, overall, we need a greater commitment in the region to make sure that people are committed to a strategy and to safe zones to allow that to stop some of the human suffering that’s going on and create -- while the rest of the conflict ensues.  And I think that we’ve got to dual-track this -- deal with the conflict as a whole and how we address it, how we deal with ISIS in combatting it, but then we also have to -- there’s a humanitarian piece to this as well with respect to the safe zones.
And I think that we were looking at both pieces of this as well.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Since the election, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson has expressed some disquiet about pulling out of the Paris agreement on climate change.  And the President has also heard from some world leaders about that.  Can you tell us, is the President still committed to pulling out of the Paris agreement on climate change?
MR. SPICER:  I think I will leave that to Secretary Tillerson.  That’s a conversation that he’s having with him as far as where we are on that.
Q    Sean, thank you very much.  I just have a follow-up to the Syria question first.  Do you have any timeline when it comes to when he wants to see those safe zones actually being built?  And I wanted to go back to the executive order on immigration.  You’ve talked about these dual-tracks, where you’re going to be doing the new executive order but also continuing to fight that in court.  Can you give us a status update on where that legal fight is and what we should see happening?
MR. SPICER:  So with respect to the executive order, there are several courts that this is being fought in -- 10 or so -- and we continue to deal with that in all of those venues.  And then again, I guess, the only way to say this is, then obviously on the dual-track side we have the additional executive order that we’ve talked about earlier that will come out and further address the problems.
We continue to believe that the issues that we face specifically in the 9th district -- 9th Circuit, rather, that we will prevail on, on the merits of that.  But on the other challenges that have come and the other venues and the others -- that we feel equally confident, as we did in Massachusetts and other venues.  So it’s not a single-track system.  
And I’m sorry, I know you --
Q    Have you made a decision yet about the Supreme Court taking it there?  And then the other question was on the safe zones and the timeline.
MR. SPICER:  So with respect to the Supreme Court, I mean, we’ve got to continue to work this through the process.  So right now it’s at the 9th Circuit.  That’s the primary problem that we are addressing.  And then we don’t have any timeline that I can announce today on Syrian safe zones.
Q    I just want to follow up to this morning’s meeting.  And the President said that he gave authorization to a couple of countries to buy military equipment from the United States.  Which countries was he referring to?  And has he gone to Congress to ask for permission to do this?
MR. SPICER:  We’ll follow up and get a list for you on that.  
Jeff.
Q    Sean, if I could ask again about the delay of the executive order until the next week.  Is the administration still trying to craft its legal argument to this to withstand scrutiny, or why again the delay?  I’m not sure I understand --
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, and I think I asked and answered this earlier.  
Q    Sorry, I don’t understand the delay.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, then I’ll explain it to you.  I think the President this time -- we were very careful to understand what the court’s concerns were and address them in the follow-up executive order.  With respect to when we’re going to announce it, part of this is to make sure that we work with the appropriate departments and agencies on the implementation of it to make sure that it is executed and it continues to be executed in a flawless manner, and that it meets the intent that it would serve.
We understand the challenges that may come, and so we want to do this in a manner that makes sure that the Hill, other members of Congress, the appropriate agencies and departments are fully ready to implement this when it’s issued.  And so that’s it.  There’s really nothing more to it.
Q    There also is some concern -- if I can follow up -- there also is concern inside the Justice Department and in Homeland Security by some officials this afternoon that we’re reporting that the White House is looking for them to help build this legal argument, to find a conclusion here.
MR. SPICER:  No, that’s not -- basically, you’re saying that we did our due diligence.  We looked to the departments to ask them to review certain things.  So last week it was we rushed stuff; this week, you’re saying that we are taking our time and -- 
Q    Has it been more difficult than you thought it would be?
MR. SPICER:  No, that’s not true.  I don’t think so.  And I think you using continued unnamed sources -- I think it actually is a -- it will be implemented flawlessly because we’ve done the right thing and gone to these individuals, sought feedback and guidance, and done this in an unbelievably comprehensive way to ensure that departments and agencies that are going to be executing and implementing this fully are aware of what’s happening.  But this has been done in a very, very comprehensive way.  
Yeah, sorry.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Melanie Arter, CNSNews.com.  Former Labor Secretary nominee Andrew Puzder admitted that for a few years he unwittingly employed an illegal immigrant as a housekeeper.  Is this administration committed to holding employers accountable when they employ illegal aliens?  And how does the administration plan to do so?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think that was -- that issue was something that Mr. Puzder was very forthcoming on.  And when he recognized the situation that had occurred, he paid all the appropriate taxes and tried to help the individual go through the proper process.  And so, yeah, we’re going to continue to make sure that we hold individuals in compliance with the law.  And he did the right thing then, but whether it’s companies or individuals, I think, we are committed to making sure that people do what’s right. 
Yes, ma’am.
Q    Veronica Clearly, with Fox 5.  I have two questions.  Janet Evancho -- she sang the National Anthem -- she requested a meeting with the President.  Her sister is transgender.  Is he going to take that meeting, or meet with anyone from the transgender community during this conversation?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think the President would be welcome to meet with her.
Q    The second question -- second question.  Steve Bannon today called the media the opposition party.  Last week, there was lots of conversation about the fake news and us being the enemy of the people.  Some have said that this is really just a branding of the media, where he did that in the primaries, branding “Little Marco” and “Lyin’ Ted”.  Is this --
MR. SPICER:  Well, no, that was the President.  Just to --
Q    Right, of course.  But is this a branding strategy to -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, I think that’s what Steve believes.
Q    But this is real.
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely, of course, it’s real.  I don’t think he’d go out -- Steve has been very clear about his position on the media and how he believes it distorts things.  So I don’t think there’s --
Q    From the whole administration?
MR. SPICER:  No, no.  Hold on.  I just said that that is what Steve’s view is.  He’s made it several times, and I think he’s very clear on that.
Sarah.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Back to the border adjustment tax.  President Trump has told Reuters that he does support some form of a border tax.  How does the President respond to critics that are saying the border adjustment tax will be passed on to lower-income and middle-class families in the form of higher prices for goods and higher prices for gas?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think if you look at holistically -- I mean, the first thing to understand is that there is no tax if you’re manufacturing in the United States, so there can be no higher cost.  But if you think about it right now, we have to look at this in a holistic way, which is, when a company chooses to leave our country and shed American jobs so they can move overseas, and then sell back to us at a lower price, there’s a big cost that comes to our economy and to our workers.  And so we’ve got to look at this comprehensively.  
But if a company chooses to stay and grow in the United States, hire more people, it actually will be a net savings, if you think about it, because it will be the companies who are overseas, who have chosen to move out of the country who will face a higher cost under these kind of plans.  
And that’s a big difference.  It will actually benefit consumers, benefit workers, and benefit out economy.  And that’s -- when you really think about the economic impact about that, that benefits our economy, it helps our American workers, it grows more jobs, it grows the manufacturing base.  And again, we are probably one of only a handful of developed countries that don’t have a tax system that looks at this.  And so right now, it’s America and American workers and American manufacturing that are the disadvantage of the current regulatory and tax system, not the other way around.
Thank you, guys.  Have a great day.  We’ll touch base tomorrow in some way.  I will see you then.  Tune in to CPAC to see the President.
END 
Press Gaggle by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 2/24/2017
West Wing
1:38 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Hey, guys.  You saw the President signed an executive order today, another important step towards eliminating job-crushing regulations and keeping the government agencies accountable by getting America back to work, just as he promised to do.  This afternoon, he's meeting with Governor Kasich.  The President of Peru, as I mentioned yesterday, will be swinging by.  Over the weekend, the President is going to be continuing to work on his joint address.  He's hosting a dinner in the State Dining Room of our nation's governors.  And the First Lady has a bunch of activities planned.  There's a ball Sunday night that the First Lady is hosting for the governors and their spouses.  
And as I mentioned yesterday -- and I think that's kind of it.  So with that, let me --
Q    What is he going to talk to Kasich about?
MR. SPICER:  This is something that they wanted to get together after the election and catch up, and discuss sort of the issues and agenda that the President is implementing, and hopefully how some of these things -- I think coal will probably come up.  But we'll try and see if we can get a readout of that afterwards.  We generally don’t provide readouts of that, but let me see what I can do.
Q    Will the RNC come up?
MR. SPICER:  Will the RNC?  What about the RNC?
Q    About the convention that he didn’t attend.
MR. SPICER:  Oh, I don’t know.  I doubt it.  My guess is that we're talking about things going forward.  It's obviously not for me to decide what the President discusses or what Governor Kasich decides to talk about.
Q    Hey, Sean, just housekeeping-wise, can you just say why you decided to do this today off camera?  And then can you talk about some of the information that has come out from senior administration officials this morning regarding some of the pushback on The New York Times reporting that was on background?
MR. SPICER:  I literally have said since day one that we would have some sort of gathering every day.  The President spoke today.  As you know, we don’t generally do -- we haven’t done briefings when the President has had a major event or an event with a world leader.  And we put it on the schedule yesterday that we were just going to gaggle.  I don’t -- I mean, this is something that we've talked about with the Correspondents' Association about making sure that we had daily contact with you guys.  
And I think -- obviously the President gave a very powerful speech today, and our job is to make sure that we're responsive to folks in the media.  We're here all day.  We've got a big staff.  And we want to make sure we answer your questions.  We don’t need to do everything on camera every day.  I think the President did a good job of making sure that -- today at CPAC, on camera, for a long time.  And I wanted to make sure that the President's message carried.  
Oh, and then with respect to --
Q    Can you talk about -- exactly, the pushback from this morning?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think -- we gathered with a small group this morning.  And I think part of this is to make sure that, especially in the case of CNN in particular, it was -- you were -- I think several media outlets, who, a majority, frankly, carried it very responsibly in terms of how the events unfolded.  But it's a pretty serious accusation.  And when you see the chyrons on CNN and the headlines and their story making it appear as though we did something wrong or nefarious, we wanted to make sure that we set the record straight.  
And I think that this morning was an opportunity to push back on what actually happened and why it happened.  And I think with respect to the events, just to be clear -- and I know we've gone over some of it -- that the deputy director of the FBI was at the White House for a 7:30 meeting, or whenever it was, the morning that the story came out.  He asked to see the chief of staff after the meeting privately, and said, in very colorful terms, that The New York Times story was not accurate.  As would anyone, frankly, at the time say, "Could you clarify that then?  If it's not true, could you clarify the story?"  The deputy director said, "I'll get back to you."  When he got back to us, he said, hey, look, we don’t want to get in the practice of starting to refute every story.  The chief of staff said, well, you've put us in a very difficult situation; you've told us that a story that made some fairly significant accusations was not true.  And now you want us to just go out there -- and I think that we have a right, if there's information, or if you're saying the story is not right, could you at least make it available to the media or some folks in the media that, yes, that story is not right?  It made very, very serious allegations.  
And further in the day, the director of the FBI said to Reince that you have every right to go out there and say that you've been briefed by us, which he did.
Q    So a clarification on that.  And on "Meet the Press," when the chief of staff obviously said that he had had permission from senior intelligence officials, he was speaking about McCabe, the deputy director?
MR. SPICER:  And the director.
Q    So they had given him explicit permission?
MR. SPICER:  They said, literally the story in The New York Times is not accurate.
Q    Sean, do you have any idea what --
Q    Sorry, I just want to follow up on this thread.  The President said today that he doesn’t like the idea of unnamed sources.  Obviously, this administration briefs on background, meaning on the condition that you not be named.  Is that going to change now?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, but I'll give you a great example.  This morning -- there's a big difference --
Q    But --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, Hallie, let me answer the question.
Q    I didn’t get to the question.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, go ahead.
Q    Is there -- go ahead, you first.
MR. SPICER:  No, I didn’t let you get to your question, so go ahead.  Seriously, keep going.
Q    The question was, do you plan to change that?  Are you going to do all your briefings on the record?
MR. SPICER:  So there is, I think, a big difference -- this morning was an example where we wanted to have a free-flowing exchange with reporters.  At the end of the conversation, several reporters said, can we use some of this on the record?  We said yes.  So the answer is, is that there is times when --
Q    But it's --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, Hallie.  Let me just answer.
Q    All right, I'm just flowing.
MR. SPICER:  I think there is an opportunity -- there's a way to use background sourcing to be able to have a much more robust discussion about some things.  We came back, as the example this morning, and said, sure, there are quotes that you can use on the record.  I think there's a big difference between explaining a policy and wanting to be able to have that kind of discussion where you say, hey, let's do this on background.  And I think, generally speaking, we've been pretty open to saying, sure, we'll put those statements on -- or if you want to clear some stuff on the record, for the most part we've been very good about it.
There's a big difference between making serious allegations -- us coming back on the record, and reporters saying, well, we have five sources that are unnamed that say contrary to that.  I think there's a point at which there's an obligation, if you're going to make a very serious allegation, and we're willing to push back on the record that there be somebody at the very least that's willing to push back on this and say that they'll put their name attached to it.  When you look at the reporting that The New York Times initially did, it was all background sources.  It basically accused the President and his campaign team of doing some very, very serious stuff.  We pushed back against that reporting at the time, and we were met with, "Well, we have unnamed sources."  And I think there's an obligation at some when, if you're going to make allegations of a serious nature, to at least make somebody go on the record and say, yes, I'm willing to stand behind that, when we're willing to or another organization is willing to refute them on the record.
So we often get met with us going on the record in multiple ways with reporters to only be told, "Well, we're not going to believe you on the record because we've got one, two, three unnamed sources that we're not going to tell you who they are, where they're from, whether or not they're even in the circle of orbit."  And in many cases, when I push against reporters, I'll say, look, there were four people in that meeting -- here are the four people.  Can you confirm any of them?  "Well, no they were people who heard from them."  So I've literally gone back to people and said, there is a room that occurred with four, five, six people in it, and this didn’t happen because I was in the room.  And they'll say, yeah, but people who were briefed by those people.  So how many degrees of telephone do you play before at least you're willing to say, if someone in the room won't at least put their name on it or you won't admit that somebody in the room is willing to say it?  I think that that undermines the credibility of some of the reporting that's going on.
Q    Can you explain the distinction that the administration has drawn between a lot of conservative anger about the Loretta Lynch and Bill Clinton conversation versus the obviously Reince Priebus-Deputy Director conversation?  The administration has said it’s different because the Chief of Staff was talking about a report, a news report and not an investigation.  But the report was about an investigation.  So does the administration worry that the Chief of Staff has crossed the line?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, hold on, hold on.  And I brought this up this morning -- sorry for those of you who have to listen to this twice -- let’s reverse-engineer this in two ways.  Number one, the deputy director comes to us.  We didn't go to them.  The differences in the case -- 
Q    I'm not going to rehash, but I want to get this -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, I am.  But I -- 
Q    I think it’s important to get on the record.
MR. SPICER:  And I will.  And, by the way, just as a side note, as I mentioned to one of your colleagues today, doing a gaggle doesn't preclude us from doing something on camera later today.  And I’m more than welcome -- I think the idea was that with time being what it is today, we wanted to just make sure that you guys got up-to-dated on a variety of issues.
But there’s nothing that precludes us from saying, hey, we’ll go do an on-camera interview.  So just the idea that we don't do something in the Briefing Room doesn't preclude.  Here's the thing -- there’s a big difference.  The deputy director came to the chief of staff of the White House and literally said, the story is false. 
So here are the two scenarios.  One is, the chief of staff says nothing and just stares at him, which is what some of the folks in this room believe he should have done, he should have just sat there and said -- (indicating) -- which, now if any of you -- the second piece of this is that nine times out of ten0, when I deal with you guys, and I’ll say we had a big problem with the story in X publication or X outlet, the first question I get asked is:  Well, did you push back?  Did you ask for a correction?  
And I think in this case, the point is, is that all we simply did was say, wow, you're bringing us information saying that something -- a story in The New York Times is not accurate.  So is there something that you're doing to let other journalists know that it’s not true?  Because they're asking us.
So that morning I got, let’s say, five, ten, fifteen phone calls from you and your colleagues, saying, "Hey, there’s a report in The New York Times -- what do you think about it?"  Well, if someone is coming to us telling us that it’s not a true story, our goal was to literally just say to them, will your public affairs office take this phone call?  
Q    Sean, is there an expectation -- 
MR. SPICER:  I just want to be clear.  I really am intrigued by I don't know what else we were supposed to do.  We were provided information.  And this notion that I see on CNN about we pushed back or we applied pressure.  Pressure, by definition, is applying force.  So if we had said, "If you don't do this, if you don't do that," that's pressure.  And I get that.  That would have been wrong.  "We order you to do this.  We require you to do that.  We're urging" -- we literally responded when presented with information and said, "Could you let the media know that, what you're informing us of?"  
And the answer was, well, we don't want to get in the middle of starting a practice of doing this.  So our answer is, well, why did you come to us with this information if not to elicit a response?  
I don't know what else you do except for say, gosh, could you clear the record up?  That is a very different scenario than trying to exert influence on a situation.  We literally responded to what they came to us with and said, okay, what are you going to do about it?
And again, if you take -- 
Q    Did you --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, I’ll finish with this, because the thing that's interesting to me is that had we not done anything and just sat there, what would -- it would have been irresponsible and, frankly, malpractice to say, yes, I was informed that we didn't do anything, and yet I didn't act.  
Q    So we talked about this six hours ago, all that same stuff.  Can we just move ahead a little bit here?  Do you have any idea what McCabe’s motivation was in coming forward?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    Because then he asked the Chief of Staff to call him back at the FBI, only to then be told from the FBI Headquarters, there’s nothing we can do.  And then it was a very small circle of people who knew about this, and yet it leaked.
MR. SPICER:  I think that's concerning.  Again, remember the timetable.  We didn't ask them for that meeting.  Reince had never met the guy prior to that morning.  He wouldn’t have known who he was.  And frankly -- so he showed up at a meeting.  Director Comey was traveling that day.  It was an intel meeting on a separate subject.  So the idea that -- and again, they don't dispute -- from what I understand -- any of this chronology that he pulled him aside.  So if you logically can ask yourself why would he have pulled him aside to update him on a story just to say, "Hey, I know we've never met before, but I just wanted to know if you read the paper today"?  Logically that makes zero sense.  
So I don't know what his motivations were.  I don't -- I think hopefully to make sure that they knew that they were informing up what the status of the story was.  
And can I make one more claim?  Because this just dovetails into something that Hallie asked.  Just so we're clear -- because I’ve seen a lot of reporting about was it proper or whatever -- first of all, there’s nothing -- there is literally a memo out from past Attorneys General about how the DOJ will deal with the White House.  There is literally a carve-out for dealing with public affairs.  This is a story in The New York Times that was not accurate, according to them.  So this idea about how we handled it, or how they handled it, there is literally in the memo -- which is all it is, it’s a guidance memo -- there’s literally a carve-out that specifically addresses how to handle public affairs.
Q    Let me just come back to the leak.  Because you've got three people who were in this loop.
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    You've got the chief of staff of the White House.  You've got the deputy director and the director of the FBI.  
MR. SPICER:  Right. 
Q    And yet this somehow leaks.  
MR. SPICER:  I think that's why the President --
Q    If the President is pursuing leaks, it would seem that he doesn't have to look too far.
MR. SPICER:  And that's why I think you've seen the President’s tweet on this today, and you've heard the President’s comments.  He is not just today, but last week at the press conference.  This is troubling when an FBI or anyone in the intelligence world, or, frankly, anyone in government entrusted with classified information and national security information is sharing that information widely.  Yeah, that's a big problem.  And I think you've seen the President’s concern for this issue.
Q    Should he fire somebody?  Is he going to fire Director Comey?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to -- I think I will leave it at the President’s tweet speaks for itself, and the President’s comments on his concern for national security -- yes, it’s concerning.  Overall -- overall, it’s concerning.
Charlie.
Q    Pulling back, this Russia narrative continues to dog the administration and it’s something that Americans have been paying attention to, it's something the media has been paying attention to.  How do you -- what’s your goal to sort of end this narrative?  Is there any way you could answer more questions, do more things to finish this thing that started right after the election, that somehow the President has an improper relationship with Russia?  Is he prepared to answer some of these questions, release some more details to finally put an end to this?  Or are we just going to continue to find out about his connections through these leaks?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, there are no connections to find out about.  That's the problem.  I think, A, he’s answered it forcefully.  You can't disprove something that doesn't exist.  He’s talked about the fact how many times he’s talked to Putin.  He has no interests in Russia.  He has no -- there’s only so many times he can deny something that doesn't exist.  
Q    Until another leak comes out?
MR. SPICER:  But what are the leaks?  The leaks don't actually -- again, you've got a story that comes out from The New York Times with unnamed sources.  You have the FBI coming to us.  And frankly -- and I don't -- I know that I do a really good job of lecturing you guys, so I’ll try to stay silent on a Friday.  But to some degree the true story -- and Chairman Nunes from the House Intelligence Committee is on the record saying that he received a report and corroborates it.  At some point, isn’t the story that actually the accusations that came out have been disputed?
Q    I guess the question is --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  The House Intelligence Committee came out, after getting the briefing, and said that the story is demonstrably false.  And I don’t mean to put words into the chairman’s mouth there.  I think he’s quoted in the Wall Street Journal.  But, at some point, isn’t the story actually that there is no story, to your point; that it’s been disproven, and it’s not the level to which The New York Times has made it to be? 
But all we have done from the get-go is exactly what you’re asking, which is to continue to disprove a negative.
Q    Sean, on that -- but continuing with that though, are you then saying that you would encourage, not interfere with, and not in any way encourage the Attorney General to suppress the investigation?  Because there is some suggestion of that.  Putting this story aside, there is a suggestion that there is suppression.
MR. SPICER:  I know, but the only suggestion, Margaret, with all due respect, is from you guys.  There was -- we were not aware of --
Q    Actually, it’s not.  There --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no -- but who?  So you have someone like Nancy Pelosi coming out and making a wildly inappropriate statement.  
Q    I'm speaking specifically to the Department of Justice, not Capitol Hill.  
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  But in other words, we’re not aware of an investigation, so how would we be able to -- well, I’m sorry, what was the word that you used?
Q    Suppression.
MR. SPICER:  But, but -- so if you’re going to make an accusation like that, where is the evidence that there has been anything that A, exists, or B, that we’ve suppressed anything?
Q    But the question was, are you actually saying any investigation -- if there was any reason to investigate, the Department of Justice should go ahead, because there is a -- 
MR. SPICER:  Sure.
Q    -- suggestion at the Department of Justice, on the --
MR. SPICER:  Sure, if there is evidence of anything -- 
Q    -- that there is --
MR. SPICER:  No, that’s their job.  Look --
Q    -- (inaudible) question.
MR. SPICER:  Right.  And I think we’ve made it clear that if there’s evidence of something, pursue it.  And we’ve said that very clearly about the House and Senate.  There is nothing to -- we have nothing to hide.  The President has been crystal-clear consistently over and over again.  And my point to you is that at some point you use words like "suppression" or "investigation" -- then show us.  Where's this investigation?  Where is the suppression that's occurring?  Where's the so-called pushback or pressure?  
I mean, respectfully, guys, I don’t -- I find a lot of this offensive.  When you talk about us pushing back on something that doesn’t exist, at some point answer the opposite -- which is, what were we supposed to do when presented by information by them?  Sit back and do nothing?  
Q    I'm not speaking about that point and case.  I'm talking about at the Department of Justice, writ large, investigating ties to Russia.  Is that an investigation that should continue to proceed?
MR. SPICER:  If they have an investigation, then they should do what they want.  They should follow the law. 
Q    And is that the message that the President has delivered to the Attorney General?  
MR. SPICER:  I mean, he literally swore him in.  I think something like, I hope you execute the -- I mean, why would he have to -- again, respectfully, it's insulting that the President would have to tell the Attorney General to follow the law.  Did you ask the same question about Obama with respect to Holder?  I mean, with all of the stuff that went out there, did you --
Q    There are reports and those are lines of questions that --
MR. SPICER:  Did you ever ask that question?
Q    I wasn’t covering that case, but there were reporters at my network who did.
MR. SPICER:  They did?  So they did.  You can --
Q    I believe it was CBS that broke the "Fast and Furious" story.  But anyway, moving --
MR. SPICER:  That's not what I asked.  No, no, I didn’t ask that question.  I'm saying, did you ever question the White House, or did CBS, on the record, question the Obama administration whether or not they asked the Attorney General to follow the law?
Q    But there is -- Sean --
MR. SPICER:  No, see what you just did?  You told ---
Q    I'm trying to answer you.  There is a sort of boilerplate speaking point, talking point to say we don’t want to impede an ongoing investigation, we hope that all those thing --
MR. SPICER:  Did you ever ask the Obama administration the same question?
Q    About this?  No.
MR. SPICER:  No, about whether or not they asked Attorney General Holder to follow the law.  These boilerplate language --
Q    There were plenty of questions about interference --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, look --
Q    Yes, there were plenty of questions about interference.
MR. SPICER:  So you can you tell me that CBS asked the White House that same question?
Q    About whether the Justice Department was interfering in investigations?
MR. SPICER:  Would follow the law, would use this "boilerplate language"?
Q    Yes.
MR. SPICER:  Okay.
Q    But to the point, there are people that --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, but you don’t get to pivot, Margaret.
Q    I'm not.  I'm actually asking to stay on the topic, which was the topic of the Russia investigation, not what you're talking about.  So on the topic of the Russia investigation, what you have said is there is no knowledge at the White House of any investigation into ties with Russia?
MR. SPICER:  I am not aware of an investigation.  If there was one, then they should follow the law.  But I don’t think -- I will definitely try to look for whether or not CBS asked the same question to the White House during the eight years of the Obama administration.  Because at least I never saw that.
Q    Sean, can you say why Mr. Priebus wanted -- when he talked to McCabe -- why did he then want the FBI to go do, on their own, bat this story down?  Was there something about it being more credible if the FBI were to speak up about than if it was just coming from --
MR. SPICER:  Okay, so just stop for a second.  Let's walk through this logically.  I come to you and say, hey, there's evidence that whatever you've been accused of is not true.  What's your response?  No, no, answer the question.
Q    You said to me that there's evidence of --
MR. SPICER:  So you've been accused of some wrongdoing, and I come to you and say, hey, guess what -- the accusations that you've been accused of I know they aren’t true.
Q    I'd love for you to tell everybody.  I'm asking specifically in this case.  I'm just asking in this case was there a sense, on this subject matter, which is politically very loaded, where you feel you haven’t been treated well, that it would be more useful for the administration if the FBI spoke up --
MR. SPICER:  No, it's not a question of useful.  They came to us and said, this story is not true.  We said, great, could you tell people that?  Reporters are asking us, we've denied it.  We did deny it.  I'm really having a tough time understanding the logic of your question.  They story gets printed in The New York Times.  Just to be clear, let's think about this for a second.  If we knew that this story was false and we wanted the FBI to pressure, wouldn’t we have asked the day before when the story was coming out?
Q    I wasn’t suggesting you asked them to pressure.  That was not the premise of the question.
MR. SPICER:  So they come to us with information that morning and say, the story that was published is not accurate.  What should have been the White House's response?
Q    I'm not going to say what your response should have been.  But do you see what I'm asking is --
MR. SPICER:  No, I don’t.  I really don’t.  I think it's insane.  I think it really -- the idea that you're saying someone tells you that something is false --
Q    Did you think that denial would be more credible if it came from the FBI instead of from you?
MR. SPICER:  Of course, it would.  Because the story listed intelligence sources as saying -- The New York Times said, according to multiple sources in the intelligence community, this is false.  If the FBI and part of the intelligence community says, we believe it's false, it came out after we had denied it -- and, of course, The New York Times didn’t believe us, said, oh, we have X number of sources in the intel community, you're wrong -- why wouldn’t we want someone with credibility who's saying, we have no evidence that this story is accurate, come out and say that?
Q    I guess what I'm aiming towards is, are you trying to -- do you guys feel like there's been background sources from the intelligence community saying things that you dispute, that you don’t like?  Is this part of a broader effort to get the intelligence community --
MR. SPICER:  That's barely -- you show a lack of -- I mean --
Q    To go on the record.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, hold on, hold on.  Just stop for a second.  They come to us and say, "The New York Times is quoting intelligence sources claiming X, Y and Z.  We don’t believe that that's accurate."  "Okay, could you please let people know that that's not true?"
Q    And I'm saying, when you say that, is that a way of asking them to get their house in order if these sources are talking --
MR. SPICER:  No, it's a way of saying -- if someone witnesses something that happened and says, I'm willing to go out and say that, hey, I saw that actually the car went right and not left, and I can clear this up -- wouldn’t you want the witness to do that?  The FBI is saying, we are in the intelligence business, we didn’t think that story was accurate; we wanted you to know.  Our answer is, great, reporters are calling us -- could you let them know?
Q    But I think that happens pretty regularly, that the FBI tells you something and they are not deciding what’s going to go into the public sphere or not.  That’s your job, right?
MR. SPICER:  Not if -- we had to -- I mean, no, actually it doesn’t, to be honest with you.  It’s the first time that I’ve seen it happen.  Obviously, we had never had -- the chairman had never -- the chief of staff had never met this guy before.  So for him to come over and say, hey, by the way -- no, that doesn’t -- at least in my 30-some-odd days, it’s never happened.
Q    I guess what I was wondering is why it’s so unusual for them to want the White House, the political component, to be the ones deciding about what gets put --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know, ask them.  Again, I hate to probably break some norm, but maybe you should direct your question to them.  I know that’s probably -- now you’re going to have stories about how I directed reporters to call the public affairs office to do -- 
Q    But I'm asking you the question.  
MR. SPICER:  No, no, because -- I know, and I’ve asked and answered it, like, 18 times.  
Q    Sean, did Reince talk to counsel, the White House Counsel’s Office after he talked to McCabe?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- it’s possible.  It’s very possible that they were in the initial meeting.  I’m sure that he has followed up with counsel and said, hey, I just was told this -- at some point.
Q    This is a bit of a difficult situation and what do we do.  
MR. SPICER:  But again, at the beginning part, the answer was to tell -- to say to McCabe, hey, let us know how you want to handle this.
Q    So that secondary --
MR. SPICER:  Just remember the response, which is, it wasn’t a directive.  We didn’t say, "Go do the following."  That’s a directive.  That could be -- we literally said, "What can you do to help get the world out?  Could you take calls from reporters?  Will you clear this up?"  
Q    But that kind of, "what could you do" wasn’t -- to your knowledge it wasn’t after he had spoken to counsel and said --
MR. SPICER:  Oh, no, it was immediate.
Q    Okay.  
MR. SPICER:  Like, "Hey, what can you do?"  And the answer that McCabe gave was, "Give me a few hours to get back to you and see what we can do."
Q    So you know what McCabe went away and did in those two hours?  I mean, was he talking to his own counsel?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know.  You should ask him.  I don’t want to --
Q    Okay.  
Q    Sean, going forward, then, with the FBI, you have a fundamental persistent dispute with them about them stepping into such matters and --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- in terms of what, Dave?
Q    In terms of if this situation arises again where they have information that they could back down an untrue story --
MR. SPICER:  I think that the FBI -- sure.  I mean, if the FBI knows something to be false, unless it hinders intelligence-gathering, an ongoing investigation, I don’t want to get in the -- I mean, our job isn’t to get in the way of them doing their job, i.e. investigating something or uncovering a plot, or whatever they’re doing.  If there’s some reason that they have to act in accordance to protect this country, they should by all means do it.  But to come to somebody and say, you’ve been accused of some pretty serious things and we know them not to be accurate, I would assume that you would want -- I mean, isn’t their job justice?  
I mean, that’s -- I mean, if you wrote a story that was knowingly false and somebody came to you and said, I know, Dave, that the story you wrote is false and I’ve got some facts to prove it, I would hope and I do believe that you would say, get them to me and I’m going to update the story.  
If this was you, and you had written a story and someone from the FBI came to you and said, hey, I know you wrote that story, Dave, or, Hallie, I saw your package last night, and, gosh, we’re in the intel community and I’m willing to let you know it’s not accurate -- I would assume that your answer would be, okay, what do I need to do to correct it, or what can I do, or what can you give me.  
Q    So the administration still maintains there is no investigation.
MR. SPICER:  No, that’s not what I said, Charlie.  No.  I literally said then when presented with a story that we were told was not accurate, our answer was, could you go tell other people that it’s not accurate or correct it, or whatever you see fit.  But what are we doing to get the story or the facts straight?
Q    So you don’t know whether or not there is an investigation.
MR. SPICER:  I know nothing more than they told us a story was not accurate.  And our answer was, what are you going to do to get the story right.  It wasn’t -- that’s it, full stop.  There was no discussion about anything beyond the story.  And the story wasn’t right.  And I believe he used --
Q    So you’re not aware of any investigation into Russia, did I misunderstand that?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not aware of one.  Huh?  You asked me if I was aware.  I am not.  
Q    Is the administration?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- that’s a pretty broad term.  I’m not aware of one.  And so -- 
Q    More broadly then, to this point, is there concern -- or what does this say about the relationship between the administration and the FBI, given that you used words like “concerned,” “troubling,” talking about leaks?  Should Americans be concerned about fallout between the White House and the FBI?
MR. SPICER:  I think you should -- no, I mean, all I know is they’ve told us some information, we’ve asked them to help get the word out.  That’s where it stands.
Q    But you called the potential leaks “troubling” and “concerning.”  
MR. SPICER:  No, I was asked about the leaks, Hallie.
Q    But you directed us back to the President’s tweet, which says, “The FBI is totally unable to stop the national security 'leakers'.”  Are we to deduce that the President has lost confidence in the FBI and the Director?
MR. SPICER:  I think that I’m going to let the President’s tweet stand for itself.  But I think that -- and again, I think he commented on this last week, that there is a concern -- these are two separate issues.  One is the instance at hand and the story that came out, and the second is the leaks that are coming out.
Q    And on a sort of semi-related note, this banner on CNN right now that says "CNN and others have been blocked from media briefings," are CNN and The New York Times not in here right now because you’re unhappy with their reporting?  And why are they not in here?
MR. SPICER:  Because we had a pool and then we expanded it, and we added some folks to come and cover it.
Q    But there’s enough room for others in here.
MR. SPICER:  It was my decision to decide -- you know, to expand the pool.  Yeah.
Q    Sean, the President said today at CPAC, “We’re going to do something about it” in reference to these stories that he is saying are false by The New York Times and CNN and others.  What is he talking about there?
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry, say the beginning.
Q    He said, “We are going to do something about it” when he was referencing --
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean, I think we’re going to aggressively push back.  We’re just not going to sit back and let false narratives, false stories, inaccurate facts get out there.  
Q    In terms of leaks, what’s the next step?  The President has been concerned --
MR. SPICER:  The President is not going to tell you how he’s going to handle this.  Obviously, that would undermine the ability to block them if people knew what he was going to do or how he was going to handle it.
Q    Can I first ask about the shooting in Kansas of the two Indian Americans and what the President’s response to it was, but also if there’s any concern that some of the rhetoric that the President or -- that generally has been out here recently could have contributed in any way to that or stepped up violence?
MR. SPICER:  I mean, obviously, any loss of life is tragic, but I’m not going to get into, like, that kind of -- to suggest that there’s any correlation I think is a bit absurd.  So I’m not going to go any further than that.
Q    Can I ask about the CEA?  Politico is saying that Kevin Hassett is the President’s choice.  I’m wondering if you can confirm that.
MR. SPICER:  I can't.  
Q    And then more broadly, the CEA is not among the President’s Cabinet positions anymore and I’m wondering if you can explain --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t think it was during Bush, was it?
Q    I know it was under Obama.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, so what’s -- okay.  Some positions are and some positions aren’t.  I mean, there are --
Q    Well, can you just explain the logic behind --
MR. SPICER:  No, I can’t.  I mean, I think the President makes a decision -- he can always expand his Cabinet.  But I think that there’s some Cabinet positions that each administration decides are part of their Cabinet, some aren’t.  And I think the President has an unbelievably talented group of economic advisors, from Steve Mnuchin to Wilbur Ross to Robert Lighthizer, should he be confirmed by the Senate, as well as Wilbur and others.
So it’s every President’s prerogative to decide beyond the statutory members of the Cabinet who else to have included.
Q    Can I follow up on the shooting?  You mentioned that -- is it the -- what part is the “absurd”?  I guess I’m just --
MR. SPICER:  Well, it’s absurd to suggest that rhetoric.  And I think the point that was at least -- I think the --
Q    I mean, the comment from the man supposedly is, “Get out of my country.”  Is it a question of it’s too early to call it a hate crime?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, but I think they’re pointing out -- at least what I thought was being asked is, is there any, like -- was it your intention to suggest that there was, like, a connection between -- 
Q    I mean, I think that -- I didn't want to say, this person did -- I mean, I don't think any of us could know that possibly.
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think to sort of -- to right now intimate what the motives are is too early.  I mean, I guess my point is to sort of jump to a conclusion.  We've seen that too often in the past -- in Florida and other places where people jump to a conclusion.  This is -- we're not going to be subject to calling a video as the Clinton -- as the Obama administration did.  I mean, let's let law enforcement do its job before we start jumping to conclusions.
Q    Do you know of any other parts of the administration looking into this potentially?  The Department of Justice, for example, maybe?
MR. SPICER:  I don't have anything for you on this.  
Q    So today, President Trump talked about how he's going to build up the military, there's going to be a big funding request.  Can you talk about how much money does the President think he's going to need to ask for?  And how is this going to be paid for?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think there's two things.  One, I think he'll touch on this in the joint address.  But, secondly, the budget that's come out will be very clear about where a lot of that funding will come from.  And so I don't want to get ahead of either of those, but I will -- I think they're good questions that will be answered in due time, both beginning with the joint address -- we'll touch on that.  And, second, from a more detailed standpoint, the budget, specifically with respect to the savings and how savings and how additional funding would be processed.
Q    And regarding the joint address, do you imagine the joint address will be kind of like this very broad, like overhead look at what the President plans to do?  Or will it be very specific, like bullet points, this is what we're going to do, very specific policies that we're going to enact?
MR. SPICER:  I think it will be a little bit of a blend.  More so the former than the latter.  I think he's going to talk very optimistically about where we're going to go as a country and the general policies that he's going to pursue to get us there.  I don't think this is going to be the same old Christmas tree kind of State of the Union.  And I think there is a little bit of a traditional tweak between a joint address and a State of the Union.  
Q    Is the President going to meet with insurers on Monday?
MR. SPICER:  I'll have Lindsay get out -- we're going to get the schedule together.  I think -- 
Q    Sean -- 
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, I told Gabi, and then I've got to be downstairs.
Q    Okay, I have a question on the budget.  With so few Cabinet Secretaries confirmed right now, is the White House working with agencies to ensure that their submissions are being -- 
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    Okay, and do you expect the budget to be thin because of the absence of Cabinet Secretaries?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    Okay.
MR. SPICER:  I think -- I mean, it may be thin, but that's because of -- I'm joking.  I think the President's commitment to getting Washington in order is going to be very apparent in the budget, and his desire to respect taxpayers and duplicity in government and programs that are outdated is going to be very much reflected in the budget.
But we start that process sometime next week, where they start the passback process of going through departments and what their top lines are and things like that.
Q    If I could just ask one more question on immigration.  Before the President was inaugurated, he said that approximately 2 million to 3 million criminal illegal aliens would be deported during his first year in office.  But according to the guidance that Secretary Kelly sent out earlier this week, they are now saying that law enforcement officials should be also looking at apprehending and deporting low-level criminal illegal immigrants and anybody that DHS deems a public risk.
How does the administration -- I mean, number one, can we expect that figure -- 2 million to 3 million -- to expand now that it seems the definition of criminal illegal aliens has expanded?  And also, how are you going to ensure that somebody who didn't just get a traffic ticket isn't included in that -- under that definition?
MR. SPICER:  I'm not -- we're not going to ensure anything.  I mean, that's the job of ICE -- or DHS and then, more specifically, ICE, is to look at who is in this country, where they sit on that.  But it is not the job of the White House to get involved and do carve-outs about misdemeanor versus that.  People who I think -- I would actually just leave it at you should contact ICE in terms of how they're prioritizing this.
Our job was to make sure that they were enforcing the laws and achieving the mission, protecting the nation, and I'll leave it at that.
Q    Was that something that the White House had spoken with Secretary Kelly about?  About expanding the definition of the individuals it would include?
MR. SPICER:  I would touch base with Secretary Kelly's office and then ICE.  But our job was to give them -- the executive order and the guidance they put out I think is pretty explicit as far as describing how that executive order is going to be carried out.  And then Secretary Kelly lays out very specifically how they're going to achieve that.  So if you look at the factsheet and the letters that he put out, I think it lays it out pretty well.
Q    Is the President hoping to have this executive order on immigration done before the joint session to Congress?  And can you talk a little bit about -- you've talked about the delay in it is related to the fact that there's been more communication with other agencies to make sure this is rolled out appropriately.  Can you talk about what -- I mean, what is the President looking for to get from these agencies?
MR. SPICER:  I think we're just trying to make sure that it is done precisely with a precision that he expects to make sure that we achieve the goal of the executive order when it's issued.
Q    Sean, on healthcare, there's a new executive -- a new draft bill, a draft proposal that's been circulating on Capitol Hill that's now been made public that, for example, shrinks Medicaid expansion, scales back subsidies, et cetera.  Is this something the President would support?
MR. SPICER:  I'm not going to get into what we are or are not going to support.  That's my understanding, from media reports, is that that's a House draft and I would respectfully ask that you follow up with them.
Q    Real quick yes or no.  The President said at CPAC this morning that we're going to see the biggest buildup of the military in American history.  Can we take that to the bank?  Is that a real promise?  Or is that --
MR. SPICER:  I think you can take what the President says to the bank.
Thank you, guys.  I've got to get downstairs.
Q    One more question just about the idea that it seems as though you're playing favorites with media outlets by excluding some from this conversation.
MR. SPICER:  You're my favorite.  (Laughter.)  
Q    No, that's not what I'm asking.  But do you have a response to that, though, given that that is a concern to some that want to see press have access to you, all out?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think that -- right -- I think that we have shown an abundance of accessibility.  We've brought more reporters into this process.  And the idea that every time that every single person can't get their question answered or fit in a room that we're excluding people -- we've actually gone above and beyond with making ourselves, our team and our briefing room, more accessible than probably any prior administration.  So I think you can take that to the bank.  When you look at -- 
Q    But why not those other outlets today?
MR. SPICER:  Because, Cecilia, there's 3,000 people that are credentialed to come in here.
Q    But there are six outlets that want to be in here right now.  The New York Times -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, there's not.  Actually, that is false.  To say that there are six -- maybe six that reached out to you, but that is not -- 
Q    Well, but -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, hold on -- 
Q    -- listed in the White House Correspondents' Association's response to this.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  There are way more than six that wanted to come in.  We started with the pool and then we expanded it.  So I get it.  But why -- I can ask -- there are plenty that want to come in at all times for every event.  We do what we can to be accessible.  And if there's a problem with that, I understand it.  But we do what we can to accommodate the press.  I think we've gone above and beyond when it comes to accessibility and openness and getting folks to -- our officials, our team.  And so, respectfully, I disagree with the premise of the question.
Thank you.
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 2/27/2017, #17
James S. Brady Briefing Room
1:43 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Wow, that's a crowd.  I hope everyone had a great weekend.  Good afternoon.  Before I begin, I wanted to introduce the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, Mick Mulvaney, to talk to you a bit about the President's budget.  When Director Mulvaney is finished, we will allow him to take a few questions and then resume the briefing and all the fun that goes with it.
So without any further ado, Director Mulvaney.
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Thanks very much.  I want to talk for a few minutes about the budget blueprint that most of you know the President started speaking about this morning with the governors.  I'll talk a little bit about what it is and what it isn't, and then talk about where we are in the budget process and what it looks like from here.
First of all, what this isn't:  This is not a full-blown budget.  That will not come until May.  So you're not going to see anything in here that has to do with mandatory spending, entitlement reforms, tax policies, revenue projections, or the infrastructure plan.  This blueprint was never going to be that, as I made clear during my Senate confirmation.  It is a topline number only.
As for what it is, these are the President's policies, as reflected in topline discretionary spending.  To that end, it is a true America-first budget.  It will show the President is keeping his promises and doing exactly what he said he was going to do when he ran for office.  It prioritizes rebuilding the military, including restoring our nuclear capabilities; protecting the nation and securing the border; enforcing the laws currently on the books; taking care of vets; and increasing school choice.  And it does all of that without adding to the currently projected FY 2018 deficit.
The top line defense discretionary number is $603 billion.  That's a $54-billion increase -- it's one of the largest increases in history.  It's also the number that allows the President to keep his promise to undo the military sequester.  The topline nondefense number will be $462 billion.  That's a $54-billion savings.  It's the largest-proposed reduction since the early years of the Reagan administration.
The reductions in nondefense spending follow the same model -- it's the President keeping his promises and doing exactly what he said he was going to do.  It reduces money that we give to other nations, it reduces duplicative programs, and it eliminates programs that simply don't work.  
The bottom line is this:  The President is going to protect the country and do so in exactly the same way that every American family has had to do over the last couple years, and that's prioritize spending.  
The schedule from here -- these numbers will go out to the agencies today in a process that we describe as passback.  Review from agencies are due back to OMB over the course of the next couple days, and we'll spend the next week or so working on a final budget blueprint.  We expect to have that number to Congress by March 16th.  That puts us on schedule for a full budget -- including all the things I mentioned, this one does not include -- with all the larger policy issues in the first part of May.  
So with that, I'll take a couple questions.
Yes, sir.
Q    Mr. Director, in order to get to your topline on the rest of the nondiscretionary -- or rest of the discretionary budget, if you're not going to touch veterans benefits, you need to slice about 12 percent off of the rest of government.  Can't you do that without affecting the services the government provides for --
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  And that's part of what this process is this week.  The numbers go out, and the numbers -- each agency will get its topline number along with recommendations from OMB as to how we think they can hit that number.  And they may come back to us and say, yeah, we think that's a good way to reach that number, or they may come back to us with other suggestions.  That's what this process is.
I think it's fairly unusual for us to be coming to you this early in the process, but we wanted to let everybody know exactly where we were.
Q    But we're not talking about 2 or 3 percent -- we're talking about double-digit reductions, and that's a lot.
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  There's going to be a lot of programs that -- again, you can expect to see exactly what the President said he was going to do.  Foreign aid, for example -- the President said we're going to spend less money overseas and spend more of it here.  That's going to be reflected in the number we send to the State Department.
Q    Thank you very much.  One quick follow on foreign aid.  That accounts for less than 1 percent of overall spending.  And I just spoke with an analyst who said even if you zero that out, it wouldn't pay for one year of the budget increases that are being proposed right now.  So how do you square that amount?  So why not tackle entitlements, which are the biggest driver, especially when a lot of Republicans over the years have said that they need to be taxed?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Sure.  On your foreign aid, it's the same answer I just gave, which is, yes, it's a fairly part of the discretionary budget, but it's still consistent with what the President said.  When you see these reductions, you'll be able to tie it back to a speech the President gave or something the President has said previously.  He's simply going to -- we are taking his words and turning them into policies and dollars.  So we will be spending less overseas and spending more back home.  I forgot your second question.
Q    On entitlements, why not address entitlements, which is the biggest driver of spending?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  It's very unusual to -- this is a budget blueprint -- what some folks used to call a skinny budget -- and it would not be at all unusual for larger policy decisions, including tax reform, revenue projections not to be included in this budget.  That will come in -- 
Q    Down the line?
Q    Sir --
Q    Hold on.  So down the line, could we see some type of budget that deals with entitlements?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  The full budget will contain the entire spectrum of the President's proposed policy changes.
Q    Director, on rebuilding the military, can you talk a little bit about more of the breakdown of that?  Can you go into a little bit more detail?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  No, I can't -- because, again, where we are in this process is that the numbers going to the DOD today and over the course of the next 10 days to two weeks, we'll be coming up with those types of details.
I've got time for one more.
Q    Will you be asking the military -- you're going to increase the military budget, but are you going to at least ask the people in the Defense Department to take a look at their budget and say, hey, where can we at least cut or at least look and make sure that we're spending the right amount of money?  Is part of that is going to be part of the process?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Well, absolutely.  That's part of what Secretary Mattis and I have already talked.  He's interested in driving more efficiencies into the Defense Department.  OMB is also going to be involved with him on the procurement process.  All of that will be incorporated in our larger budget in May.
Q    So it's not just like a blanket -- "Here, we're going to throw money at you, do what you want"?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  No, sir.  No, sir. 
Last one.
Q    Does this account for spending for the President's wall, either in the $30 billion we've heard you're going to request for this year or the $54 billion increase?  Does that include money for the wall, how to pay for the wall?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  It would be more likely -- excuse me, a little bit of both.  We do expect to include some money in a future supplemental for 2017 for the wall, and a 2018 budget will also contain some longer-term dollars for that.
Q    So it will be split up between the two.
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  I believe that to be the case.
Thank you all very much.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you, Director.
So let me get back to -- I'll be right there in a second, April.  
This morning, the President dropped by the National Governors Association meeting, where 49 governors from both states and territories joined Cabinet members and senior White House staff to discuss where they can work together to rebuild the country and restart the economy.
While at the meeting, the President delivered a statement on his forthcoming budget proposal, which he'll submit March 16th, as you just heard the Director mention.  The President's budget will, first and foremost, keep Americans safe.  That means investing in both our nation's physical and financial security.  We will rebuild the nation's military.  An increase in defense spending, including increased funding for our veterans and our border, will be matched by equal reductions in nondefense programs.  The savings in our budget will come from looking at outdated and duplicative programs.  The reductions spending will be sensible and rational, but they will also be tough.  
With our nation's debt spiraling out of control, we simply must take a look at the way we're spending taxpayers' dollars.  Families across the country are being forced to make difficult choices, because for too long the federal government has not treated their money with the respect they deserve.  The national debt exploded under the last administration from $10.6 billion [trillion] on January 20th, 2009 to $19.9 trillion the day before -- sorry, those are both trillions -- the day before the President's -- President Trump's inaugural.  Every child born in America this year will inherit an average of over $60,000 in debt.  And that, frankly, is too much. 
Our budget will restore respect for taxpayers' dollars while funding all the necessary programs to keep our country safe and prospering.  This meeting with the governors was a continuation of a weekend of engagement and discussion between the governors and the administration.  The President and the First Lady welcomed the governors last night to the White House for the Annual Governors Ball.  And yesterday, the Vice President had a very productive meeting with several governors.
The administration is proud to be working with the governors on rebuilding our nation's infrastructure, reforming our healthcare system, and putting Americans back to work.  I know that Obamacare, in particular, was put into place without a lot of input from governors.  We're committed to consulting and including them on this and so many other subjects as we solve the nation's biggest issues together.
Later this morning, the President had a listening session with some of our country's leading healthcare insurance companies.  Interestingly, on yesterday's ABC "This Week," Minority Leader Pelosi actually laid out a great outline of how to judge Obamacare's success based on what it was supposed to achieve.  She said, "It had three goals:  One, to lower the cost, the other to expand benefits, and the third to improve and increase access."
So let's go through her criteria.  Lowering costs:  While this year all four tiers of Obamacare insurance plans are facing double-digit increases in average premiums.  Just to take a look at one set of premiums, for standard silver plans in the states, 63 percent increase in Tennessee, 69 percent increase in Oklahoma, and a staggering 116 percent increase in Arizona.
 On expanding benefits:  In reality, the new law’s mandates have led to max cancellations of coverage, soaring out-of-pocket costs, and declining enrollment figures.  Millions are choosing to pay a tax over buying the government-mandate insurance. 
Increased access:  With insurance fleeing the marketplace, Americans are facing a dwindling number of insurance choices with 17 percent of Americans left with only one insurer option available in their exchange.  Insurers will be indispensable partners in the transition period out of Obamacare into the Patients First plan the President will be working with Congress to put in its place.  The President’s plan will encourage innovation, modernize our healthcare system, and provide immediate relief, and ensure access to quality, truly affordable care.
This afternoon, the President had lunch with Vice President Pence and Ambassador Haley.  Afterwards, he’s having a meeting with Speaker Ryan and Majority Leader McConnell.  And then following that, he’s going to be meeting with Secretary of State Tillerson.  The Secretary is coming off a very successful trip to Mexico that -- he was joined by Secretary of Homeland Security Kelly.  I’m sure the President is looking forward to discussing that trip with the Secretary.
Also this afternoon, the Vice President will be speaking to an extraordinary group of 60 presidents of Historically Black Colleges and Universities.  There will be a pool spray at the top of the event, and the Vice President’s office will release his remarks and photos following the event.  We can also expect a meeting with the President with them as well.
This evening, the President will have dinner with regional press affiliates that are going to be in town for the joint session of Congress.  While it’s tradition for representatives from the networks to meet with the President before his joint address, this is the first time, to my knowledge at least, that the opportunity has been expanded to include representation from 18 regional outlets from around the country.
Tomorrow, the President will also have the traditional lunch with the network anchors.  Beyond the so-called "big five" networks, we’ve also opened it up and invited outlets including Telemundo, Univision, CBN, EWTN, OANN, PBS, C-SPAN, and TV1.  
Tonight, the President looks forward to seeing his nominee for the Secretary of Commerce, Wilbur Ross, confirmed by the Senate.  Secretary-designate Ross has been an important champion for U.S.-struggling industries in the private sectors.  And pending his confirmation this evening, he’ll now do in the same post on behalf of the American people what he has done in private sector.  Assuming everything goes according to the plan in the Senate tonight, we expect to have his swearing-in tomorrow here at the White House.  
Also tomorrow, the President will deliver his first address to both houses of Congress.  In his speech, the President will lay out an optimistic vision for the country, crossing traditional lines of party, race, socioeconomic status.  As I said before, the theme will be the renewal of the American spirit.  He will invite Americans of all backgrounds to come together in the service of a stronger and brighter future for our nation.
In addition to laying out the concrete steps the President has already taken to make the American Dream possible for all of our people, he will talk about the bold agenda -- he wants to work with Congress.  This includes tax and regulatory reform to provide relief to hardworking Americans and their businesses, making the workplace better for working parents, ensuring the families who have suffered under Obamacare’s skyrocketing rates see it replaced with a patient-centered alternative, making sure every child in America has access to a good education, a rebuilding of our military and fulfilling of our commitments to veterans to whom we obviously owe a great deal of gratitude.
You can expect to see a speech grounded firmly in solving real problems for every American -- how can we make sure that every American who needs a better job get one, how can we get kids who are trapped in failing schools into better ones, how we can keep gangs and drug violence out of our neighborhoods and communities.  The President will address the Americans who have been waiting for help from their leaders for too long, and let them know that help is finally on the way.
With respect to the speech, we will be having a background briefing sometime this evening here in the briefing room.  We will provide additional details later in the afternoon.  
As you might already know, the Department of Defense presented its preliminary plan to the White House today to defeat ISIS.  This plan has been delivered by Secretary Mattis, who is currently briefing the principals on the option presented today in seeking their input and feedback.
Finally, I wanted to note the President continues to be deeply disappointed and concerned by the reports of further vandalism at Jewish community -- Jewish cemeteries, rather.  The cowardly destruction in Philadelphia this weekend comes on top of similar accounts from Missouri and threats made to Jewish community centers around the country.  The President continues to condemn these and any other form of anti-Semitic and hateful acts in the strongest terms.  From our country’s founding, we’ve been dedicated to protecting the freedom of our citizens' rights to worship.  No one in America should feel afraid to follow the religion of their choosing freely and openly.  The President is dedicated to preserving this originating principle of our nation. 
And while we’re at it, I don’t want to get ahead of the law enforcement, but I was asked the other day about the story in Kansas -- the shooting in Kansas.  And while the story is evolving, early reports out of Kansas are equally disturbing. 
So with that, I’ll be glad to take your questions.  Jon.
Q    Sean, there’s a report this morning that you reached out directly to CIA Director Pompeo.  Did you directly contact Director Pompeo and ask him to knock down the New York Times story on the Russia connection?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Jon.  Let me kind of, if I may, walk through the entire timeline.  I think it’s important.
As I mentioned I think a week ago, the New York Times published a story about what they called “contacts” between members of the Trump campaign and Russian officials.  The FBI deputy director was at a meeting here at the White House that morning.  After the meeting concluded, he asked the chief of staff to stand back a second, he wanted to tell him that the report in the New York Times was “BS.”  For viewers at home, I think you can pretty much figure what that means, but I’ll leave it at that.
At that time, the chief of staff said, thank you for sharing that with me, can we let other people know that the story is not accurate.  Throughout the day, they went back and forth to see what they thought was appropriate.  Finally, came to the conclusion that they did not want to get in the process of knocking down every story that they had issues with.  
They then -- we then were informed that other people had come to the same conclusions, including -- at that time, Chairman Devin Nunes had told us, hey, I’ve been knocking this down, telling reporters.  We shared a number with him of a reporter that had contacted us.  And again, when the reporters contact us and we said, no, that’s not -- to the best of our knowledge that’s not true, they were asking us, can you point to -anybody else that can substantiate this?  And I think we did a good job of saying, sure, we will share with reporters other people who have come to the same conclusion.  
So I won't go into the specifics.  I will say that I think we did our job very effectively by making sure that reporters who had had questions about the accuracy and the claims made in The New York Times, that we were pointing them to subject-matter experts who understood whether or not that story was accurate or not.  And I think just to continue to be very, very clear on this -- it was about the accuracy of the reporting and the claims that were made in there, plain and simple -- about whether or not a story that appeared in The New York Times was accurate.  And individual after individual continued to say that, as far as they knew, they weren’t.  
I think most of you probably saw Chairman Nunes's comments this morning.  He was very clear, number one, that he reached out to us to say, I've been telling people, reporters, that these allegations and descriptions in The New York Times are not accurate.  And then we shared that information with him.  But he came to us to share that he equally had that issue brought up to him, he was briefed and saw "no evidence" that the story was accurate. 
So the answer is, we have continued to give reporters information and sources that went to the accuracy, or lack thereof, of a report that was in a newspaper.  And I think Chairman Nunes also equally said it's interesting how we literally were engaging with the press, saying, if you have a question about the sourcing on this -- obviously, when brought to our attention, we said, it's not accurate as we know, but then most of you and your colleagues who had inquired would say, well, that's great, I'm sure you're saying this, but who else can corroborate this?  So our job was to continue to -- when informed -- share sources who had equally come to the same conclusion that the Times story was not accurate. 
Q    You don’t think there's something strange about -- something odd about the White House Press Secretary getting the CIA director on the phone to knock down a story about an investigation?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, but see, respectfully, you're using words like "knock down."  There was a story in a newspaper --
Q    Was it disputed?
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  No, no -- there was reporters coming to us saying, there is a story out there, what's your take on it?  And our answer was, we don’t believe it's accurate, we don’t* [do] believe it's false.  But obviously that's our take on it.  And reporters were saying to us, well, is there anybody that you can point to to substantiate this claim?  
Now, remember, this all started with the FBI coming to us, bringing to our attention, saying that the story in the Times was not accurate -- in fact, it was BS -- and all we did was simply say, that's great, could you tell other reporters the same thing you're telling us?  And I would think that other reporters, yourself included, would think that that would be a helpful thing to get the story straight.  All we sought to do was to actually get an accurate report out.  And again, I think Chairman Nunes this morning, over and over and over and over again, made it very clear that no evidence that has been brought to his attention suggests that that reporting was accurate.
So, respectfully, I think it's interesting that I'm being asked what's appropriate when what we're doing is actually urging reporters to engage with subject-matter experts who can corroborate whether or not something is accurate or not.
Q    Should there be a special prosecutor?  Darrell Issa has called for a special prosecutor to look into this.
MR. SPICER:  And I guess my question would be, a special prosecutor for what?
Q    To look into the whole Russia connection, the whole Russia influencing --
MR. SPICER:  And here's my -- right.  And I guess my --
Q    I mean, he was part of the campaign, so -- I mean, Sessions was part of the campaign, the Attorney General.
MR. SPICER:  I understand.  But here's my question, Jonathan:  We have now for six months heard story after story come out about unnamed sources say the same thing over and over again, and nothing has come of it, right?  We've heard the same people, the same anecdotes, and we've heard reports over and over again.  And as Chairman Nunes made very clear today, he has seen nothing that corroborates that.  So at what point -- you got to ask yourself, what are you investigating? 
Q    Well, Russian interference -- I mean, beyond the context.
MR. SPICER:  No, and I think that both the House and the Senate have looked at it.  You know as well as I do that the intelligence community has looked at it as well.  There's a big difference.  I think that Russia's involvement in activity has been investigated up and down.  So the question becomes at some point, if there's nothing to further investigate, what are you asking people to investigate?  
I mean, Chairman Nunes spoke very clearly today when asked over and over and over again about all of this, and said that he has seen nothing that leads him to believe that there's there.  The President has spoken forcefully time and time again that he has no interests in Russia, he hasn’t talked to people in Russia in years, and yet you keep asking -- and when I say "you," collectively -- to try to find something that seemingly, at least the reporting that I'm seeing in different organizations, suggests that there's nothing new that's being reported.  It's the same stuff over and over again that we've heard for literally six months.  And so the question becomes at some point, what do you need to further investigate if there is nothing that has come out?
Q    Can you not categorically deny there were no contacts between the Russians and anybody on the campaign?
MR. SPICER:  I can't deny -- I can't -- I guess my question is --
Q    That's what the investigation would look at.
MR. SPICER:  Right.  And I guess my point is, is that you've had the intelligence community look at Russia's involvement in the election.  You had the House and Senate both do the same.  And so what I'm trying to ascertain is that at what point -- how many people have to say that there's nothing there before you realize there's nothing there?  I can't say unequivocally -- all I'm saying is, the people who have done the investigating about Russia overall and its activities in the United States, specifically now with respect to our election, haven’t provided anything that leads me to believe or should lead you to believe -- and I continue to see reports coming from -- there were media sources saying when they checked in with law enforcement, or intelligence community sources, there's nothing more than has been previously reported over and over again.
So, at some point, you do have to ask yourself, what are you actually looking for?  How many times do you have to come to the same conclusion before you take the answer?  And that's where I -- Mara.
Q    Just to be clear, did you -- just to follow up on that, did you personally reach out to Pompeo?  
MR. SPICER:  I'm not going to discuss what we did internally.  I'm just going to say that when we shared -- we did our job about making sure that when people had -- reporters had questions, we let them know what subject-matter experts were available to discuss the accuracy of the newspaper story.
Mara.
Q    Yeah, I'm sure people will come back to this, but I actually have a budget question, which is:  During the campaign, the President said he was not going to touch Medicare or Social Security.  His Treasury Secretary repeated that.  It sounded like the OMB Director was leaving that as an open question, TBD.  I'm just wondering, what's the state of the promise?  That we won't touch it for current retirees --
MR. SPICER:  What the OMB Director made clear is how it works.  The budget is dealing with the topline discretionary numbers.  Policy decisions are not part of the budget.  That was what he was being asked and what he -- so I just want to be clear in terms of what it was.  And again, I think --
Q    -- the state of the promise.  In other words what is the promise.  
MR. SPICER:  Right.  And I think the state of the promise is clear.  And I think, as you point out, he had made the promise, he stands by the promise.  The Treasury Secretary --
Q    But what is the promise?  Current retirees?  People near retirement?  Anybody paying into --
MR. SPICER:  I will follow up specifically on that.  But I think the President has made very clear that it's not his intent to do -- he wants to focus on the discretionary side; that entitlement reform is not -- that, with respect to those programs that he mentioned, he stands by his word.
Fred.
Q    I wanted to ask a couple issues.  An executive order on religious freedom had previously been in the works.  Will that still come?  And if it does, will it extend beyond religious freedom?
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry, Fred, what?
Q    Will it extend beyond the Johnson Amendment?
MR. SPICER:  I think we've discussed executive orders in the past, and for the most part we're not going to get into discussing what may or may not come until we're ready to announce it.  So I'm sure as we move forward we'll have something.
Olivier.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  
Q    I'm sorry, just one more.  The issue of types of reforms.  Will there be -- how committed is the administration to a border adjustment tax?  And is there any concern that there won't be enough conservative support for that; that it could block any meaningful tax reform long-term? 
MR. SPICER:  Well, I'm not going to get into the specifics of tax reform today.  The President has made clear that we'll have an outline of the plan very soon.  But what I will say is that I think he has talked about the concerns that he has with current regulatory and tax policy that benefit people from moving out of the country and shipping jobs -- or products back in while shedding American workers.  He will continue to fight for policies that promote manufacturing and job creation in the United States, and supports American workers.  
So I don’t want to get ahead of the exact nature of the policy.  He has been seeking a lot of input.  As I mentioned earlier, he's going to talk today with Speaker Ryan and Senator McConnell.  I know that both the joint session, the status of repeal and replace, and I'm sure some discussion of tax reform will probably come up.  But there's a lot -- we're continuing to move forward and work with them.
Olivier.
Q    Thanks.  A couple on the ISIS strategy.  Can you just get to the timetable from now, now that you received it -- what happens?  And there's a report that you're asking for $30 billion in emergency defense spending on top of the $54 [billion] in the budget.  Is that true?  Does that cover the new ISIS strategy?  Can you explain what's different between the two?
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  Right now, literally, that principals meeting -- or principals meeting that I mentioned at the beginning is happening as we speak.  So Secretary Mattis was coming over to brief the principals as far as the ISIS plan.  And again, part of it was to make sure that he fully discusses the recommendations that he's making and seek the input and feedback of the other principals downstairs.  That can help guide where we go from here, how we go.  With respect to the funding, I think Director Mulvaney noted that there will be a supplemental at some point.  Right now the focus is on the budget, and then we'll go from there.
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Two brief questions.  First, I read your statement at the Thursday briefing to Governor Malloy of Connecticut during the NGA meeting.  And he responded -- and I quote -- "Sean didn’t read a thing that I said."  He said that he -- in Connecticut, they are already working to get criminals who are in the country illegally out.  His objection was to going into warming centers or schools where officials might frighten children.  Your response to the Governor on that?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, I was asked specifically what his stance -- what the comments were with respect to sanctuary cities.  And again, I would reiterate, with all due respect to the Governor, I'm not here to pick a fight with the Governor.  I enjoyed my time going to school in the state of Connecticut.  I have a kind affection of the Nutmeg State.  But the reality is, I think that there's a difference.  Whether or not what he wants to do is state funds, maybe -- without knowing the exact nature of how he's funding, what he's funding, it's difficult.  The question I was asked at the time was on how we would be handling it.  And I think the answer, whether it's Connecticut or California, is that the President's executive order and the President's commitment is to make sure that tax dollars are not used to support programs that are helping people who are not in the country legally and who are not citizens entitled to them.
Q    One more question, Sean.
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  Starting early.  (Laughter.)  
Q    For 58 years, when Presidents have gone to Rome, they've always met the Pope, going back to when President Eisenhower met Pope John XXIII.  Now, one year ago this week, candidate Trump had a disagreement with this Pope and an exchange of words.  When he goes to Rome in May for his first European trip, will he meet with this Pope?
MR. SPICER:  That's a great question.  Obviously, I would be a huge fan of that.  But I'm not going to -- I don’t think we're at that place in the planning process to make an announcement on any visits with the Pope.
Blake.
Q    Sean, thank you.  Two budget questions, if you don’t mind.  Mr. Mulvaney, I believe, just said that what the administration plans on putting forward doesn’t add to the current deficit projection, which the CBO says is about $560 billion.  But he didn't say that it would significantly draw from that either.  So my first question is, is the administration comfortable putting something forward that might rack up deficits of potentially hundreds of billions of dollars?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think -- I'm trying to understand the question a little, if you can help me with this.  Because he --
Q    He said it wasn’t going to add to it.
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    So my question is, he didn't necessarily say it was going to cut from it, either.  If it doesn't cut from it, potentially it could be hundreds of billions in deficit.  And I'm curious -- 
MR. SPICER:  Right, no, but I think -- correct me if I'm wrong -- I mean, he basically made it very clear it doesn't add to the projected baseline deficit.  So that continues to be the goal.  And I think as we continue to work through this process, the passback, you know, it can work both ways.  We could identify further savings and reductions through working with the agencies and departments, but we're going to make sure that the topline number we maintain is as close to that as possible.
And as we go through this -- I mean, this is the beginning of the process as the director noted.  We send the number to the department or the agency, give them some ideas, how we came up with this, and then they come back to us and either justify why a particular program or office, or what have you, needs to stay in existence or why maybe not the reduction that is offered.  But it's a back-and-forth process that will occur over the next few weeks.  So to get ahead of it is the problem.
Q    Let me ask you what Nancy Pelosi -- to just get a quick reaction to Nancy Pelosi.  She put out a statement and said the following:  "Five weeks into his administration, President Trump has not introduced a single jobs bill."  Your reaction to that would be what?
MR. SPICER:  He's created a lot of jobs.  I think that's -- he's continuing to work with Congress on both repealing and replacing Obamacare, tax reform.  And, fundamentally, both of those two items alone I think can help spur a lot of economic growth.  The meetings that we've had with the CEOs, the health insurers -- there are so many things that are both job-killing and that can be done to help promote a better regulatory and tax climate that lead to job creation.
I think that's one of the biggest problems right now is that people in Washington aren't necessarily talking to job creators and saying, what is the impediment that you have to hiring more American workers?  What are the impediments that you have to manufacturing more, to building here?
The meetings and the actions that the President has taken on both regulatory and other matters have helped spur job creation.  You've heard these companies come in over and over again -- the automakers, airlines, Sprint -- I mean, the list goes on and on and on of people saying to the President, because of your agenda, because of your vision, we're willing to commit to hiring additional people to manufacturing more.  That's how jobs are created -- it's not through the government.  And too often, it's the government regulations that stifle and prevent job creation.  And I think the President, as a businessman, fully appreciates and understands how this works and what some of those impediments do to creating jobs and to growing the economy.
And so I would just say that you haven't seen anything yet.  It's going to continue to be the case.
Trey.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Is there concern in the administration that a large-scale military buildup will appear threatening to other countries around the world and lead to some sort of arms race with other countries?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think when you look at the state of some of the infrastructure in our military, whether it's the age of our ships or our planes or some of the other hardware that exists, you recognize that we need to rebuild a lot of these things.  The size of our Navy has gone down significantly.  And there are new needs and new -- and when you look at the commitment that you have to make not just in one year but in several years, for a lot of these programs -- ships and tanks, even weapons systems -- they don't get built in a month or a day.  You have to make a commitment early on to make the investment because of the time that it takes to procure them, to build them, the research and development that goes into it.
And so I would just suggest to you that this is the first step in making sure we make the commitment to a military that through, especially through the sequester the last few years, has not gotten the funding it needs to get off life support.  There are a lot of things that are being taken care of for the military where they're just continuing to -- they're not putting the systems and the projects in place to allow the military to keep up with the times, and that's a problem.
Major.
Q    Sean, one investigation question and one budget question.  As you may be aware, Bill Owens, the father of William "Ryan" Owens, gave an interview with the Miami Herald over the weekend and he said, "The government owes my son an investigation."  On behalf of the President of the United States, is the President open to an investigation to the raid in Yemen?  And the father of Ryan Owens called that a "stupid" mission.  Is there something that you'd like to communicate to him about that mission that might persuade him otherwise?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, thank you.  That's multi-part, so let me kind of walk through it slowly.
First of all, I can't possibly imagine what he's going through in terms of the loss of his son.  I can tell him that on behalf of the President, his son died a hero and the information that he was able to help obtain through that raid, as I've said before, is going to safe American lives.  It's going to protect our country more.
So he made a sacrifice to this country.  He was on his 12th deployment.  And I know that his wife, when she spoke to the President, knows that he did this because he loved it, he cared about our nation.  And the mission was successful in helping prevent a future attack or attacks on this nation.  It obtained a lot of information that will help us keep safe.
With respect to his request, it is standard operating procedure for the Department of Defense to undergo what they call a 15-6 review.  That review, in this case, is three-pronged.  Because there was a fatality and a loss of life, there's that.  Because there were civilians involved, that's another.  And then third is because there was hardware -- a helicopter that was damaged.  That is a separate.  So, in fact, there will be three reviews done by the Department of Defense because of the nature of this.  
But, again, I can't stress enough that on behalf of the President, on behalf of this nation, we express our condolences, extend our prayers to him during this time.
Q    As you said, that is standard procedure.  Is there anything the President is particularly curious about with this mission, in that it was brought to him, he authorized it quickly?  Does he believe in the main it was carried out well and there's nothing that he's particularly curious about in the way either the helicopter was damaged, fatality, the civilian casualties -- anything of the like?
MR. SPICER:  Well, number one, I've walked through the timetable previously in terms of how long this had been planned for, dating well back into the previous administration.  And as you know, their recommendation at the time was to wait for a moonless night.  That night wasn't going to occur during President Obama's administration.  And so when General Mattis got into the Department of Defense, he was briefed up on the status of the thing, made aware of when the next time was go.  We went through the process to ensure that we continued to believe that the mission -- the way it was going to be conducted and the results of the mission would be worthy of action.  
The conclusion continued to be, as it was prior, that we should move forward.  As I mentioned before, I think you can't ever say that, when there's most importantly loss of life and people injured, that it's 100 percent successful.  But I think when you look at what the stated goal of that mission was -- it was an information- and intelligence-gathering mission.  And it achieved its objectives.
So, again, I would express our thoughts and our prayers and our condolences to all of the people in Chief Owens's family and his friends, his shipmates.  But it's something that, as a SEAL and as somebody who deployed 12 times, he knew that this was part of the job and he knew what he was doing.  And so we're very comfortable with how the mission was executed, and we'll let the Department of Defense go through that review process and then see where that leads us.
But I think to get ahead of the three separate reviews that are being done by the Department of Defense would be probably a little irresponsible at this time.
Q    Sean --
MR. SPICER:  Major gets two, too.  
Q    Just real quick on the budget.  As you're aware, to undo the defense sequester, you have to get 60 votes in the Senate because you have a separate domestic sequester number and defense.  Are you confident with these numbers and with this kind of heavy discretionary spending cut proposed, you can get the 60 votes to change the law?  Because without that change in law, the proposal is just that -- it doesn't become operational.
MR. SPICER:  I think that when it comes to our nation's security, specifically our nation's military, I don't think that it's a partisan issue.  I think that senators from across the country -- whether you're talking about Florida or whether you've got an Army installation or a Navy base, you understand the state of repair that many of our planes, ships and other hardware is in.  And I think that there is a bipartisan commitment to give the military and its members the equipment and the tools it needs to succeed and protect this country.  So I do feel confident.
April.
Q    Sean, I have a couple of budgetary questions for you.  One, at the press conference, President Trump talked about the fix for inner cities.  What is the investment in this budget when it comes to a fix for inner cities?
MR. SPICER:  It's a good try.  I think the Director was very clear -- 
Q    That's one --
MR. SPICER:  I mean, part of the process today was to start that passback process that he talked about, where we're going to the various departments, whether it's HUD or DOT, and giving them that topline number and then hearing back.  So I don't want to get into a specific number with you before we get too far down the process.  I think that's a conversation that we're going to have with the agencies and then we will have subsequently with Congress when they start drafting their resolutions.
Q    Okay, a follow-up on this, but I do have a question on HBCUs.  See, he talked about healthcare.  He talked about education and he talked about crime.  He needs to talk about Chicago and law enforcement.  So you don't have any kind of budgetary numbers when it comes to it?  And healthcare is a piece that is one of the line items for this budget.
MR. SPICER:  That's right.  And I'm not saying that we don't have numbers.  I'm saying that we're not giving them out.  That's a big difference.
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. SPICER:  I know.  (Laughter.)  You're going to do a good job trying.  (Laughter.)
But as the Director noted on this, that they have come up with topline numbers based on their going through each of these agencies’ budget, and saying, hey, there’s a duplicative program here.  In some cases, maybe they give them more, maybe they give them less.  Part of it is to begin that conversation, that process, with the departments and agencies to figure out what those investments are.  Maybe it’s repurposing existing funds in a different way.  
So it’s not necessarily a zero-sum game.  There is a way that a department can reallocate money to a program that might end up benefitting because there is a duplicative or out-of-date program or office that that savings could be applied to something.  But I don’t want to get ahead of the process right now, only to say that we are at the very beginning of it.
Q    And one on HBCUs.
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    The President is going to see the 80-plus presence of HBCUs with the Vice President today.  Some of them are very concerned as to what this executive order looks like, and they are waiting to hear the commitment before they say, "I’m all in."  What is the commitment that this President is trying to make when it comes to HBCUs to ensure, I guess, their future, or deal with funding for research projects, what have you, or moving it out of the Department of Education to the purview of the White House?  What is the commitment that he’s going to give to them?
MR. SPICER:  So, look, I don’t generally speak about executive orders until they’re finalized.  I will just say that one of the things that I think there’s commitment from this White House to do is to look at the various resources throughout the federal government that support HBCUs.
So, for example, the Department of Defense has ROTC and NROTC programs.  Are they being properly -- is that funding being properly executed and spent.  There’s programs within each of the departments -- the Department of Education, the Department of Housing and Urban Development -- that affect grants or programs or direct funding that go to HBCUs for various different things, whether it’s construction projects, or teaching programs, or mentorship programs.  Whatever it is, they span throughout the entire government.  
And I think that what we are committed to doing is ensuring that there is a high level of understanding and commitment, that goes straight to the President, of how we harness those resource within the government, and make sure that they’re doing what they’re supposed to be doing. 
So it’s one thing to have them, right, spread throughout the different departments.  It’s another thing to make sure that there’s a direct pipeline to the President of the United States that those programs are being executed in a way that’s benefitting the future of HBCUs and the various projects and teaching that goes on there.
Q    And so what are you saying -- there’s going to be a piece that is going to basically go throughout all the agencies to make sure that there is some kind of commitment to HBCUs and contract of like, let's say engineering for some schools, or in research for other schools?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I would say -- I think I’m going to stick to waiting until we announce it to get out a lot more.  
Q    Is that today or tomorrow?
MR. SPICER:  I anticipate it very soon.  How is that?  I want to give myself a little wiggle room.
Phil Rucker.
Q    Yeah, Sean, thanks.  A budget-related question, but on infrastructure.  The President has repeatedly, including today, again, called for a major infrastructure plan to the tune a trillion dollars -- roads, bridges, tunnels, you name it.  Can you explain where that money is going to come from, how it fits into the budget that's under review right now, and what the timeline for that project would be?
MR. SPICER:  So I think that would be part of a longer-term discussion that we’re having with Congress.  As you know, the President got in office 30-some-odd days ago.  The idea of getting a budget is -- you know, it’s commonly referred to as a skinny budget -- is to get the government to continue to be funding and it will be something that we’ll work with Congress. 
I understand your point.  The President continues to talk about the status --
Q    -- a priority for him.
MR. SPICER:  It is.  Absolutely.  But I think that we’ve got to make sure that it’s done right and that we work with Congress.  I think, as you correctly mention, there’s obviously a funding mechanism to this.  And we’ve already talked about things like comprehensive tax reform that could add to that discussion.  
And so I just -- I understand what you’re asking in terms of how this would be funded and when it will be coming, and the pay-fors, but we’re working with Congress to have that discussion.  I think that comes probably outside of the budget discussion.
Q    And so how does he square that with the need to tighten the belt, which he also talked about today -- we’ve been spending too much as a government and we need to cut our spending?
MR. SPICER:  Right, but I think -- but in the same manner that we’re presenting the budget.  So we’re talking about adding $54 million -- $54 trillion, rather -- a billion dollars to -- thank you.  Appreciate the help here.  (Laughter.) 
But we’re looking to add that to defense.  And so what it means is that we have to look through other programs to find reductions in savings.  I think that same kind of discussion would happen with respect to infrastructure, not necessarily the savings piece, but the funding piece; that there’s several ways -- and I know that there’s a lot of discussion, private-public partnerships that he is started to have a discussion with in terms of the funding mechanism.
And so all I’m trying to get at is that there are various ways to do this funding without just relying on the American taxpayer in terms of additional taxes.  There are spending reductions, there are other funding mechanisms, and I think, in due course, we will get around to that discussion.
Q    And just related to that, he mentioned in his remarks about infrastructure today that as he drives through the Queens-Midtown tunnel and the Lincoln tunnel, he worries about ceiling tiles falling.  Is there a specific incident he was talking about where people have been injured, or is that just a fear of his?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know.  I’ll ask.  (Laughter.)  But I’m sure Secret Service will take care of the -- alleviating the medium concerns.
Hold on.  Alexis.
Q    Sean, I have two questions.  First, one on healthcare.  Because the OMB director was signaling that the complete budget would be made ready early May, and the President today described how complicated he had discovered that the healthcare repeal and replace has become, can you describe when it is that the President would present his framework for an overhaul of healthcare?  Is it going to be included in the budget so we would see it before May?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t think you’re going to see it in the budget, no.  That’s not the appropriate vehicle for it.  I think I’ve mentioned it before.  I think you would drive -- or at least the leading option, before I get locked into something, is to add Obamacare to the FY17 budget process and put it through reconciliation.  So that would happen outside of the current budget structure.
But I think he has also been very clear that he wants this outline within a matter of weeks, and that we continue to have these discussions with House and Senate leadership, with Ways and Means, and Energy and Commerce, and then similar on Senate finance on the Senate side.  
So when he talks to Speaker Ryan and Leader McConnell today, I’m sure that conversation will continue.  
Q    Just to follow up on healthcare, because not every ingredient in the Affordable Care Act can be handled in reconciliation.  That’s why I was asking about the elements of it that we see in the budget.
MR. SPICER:  That’s right.
Q    So we will see some of those?
MR. SPICER:  Well, there’s several pieces of Obamacare.  Some can be done by executive order, some get done with 50 votes, some have to be done specifically in reconciliation.  I think counter to Major’s point on a previous question, that there are certain things that have to be done in certain ways legislatively, and to create a comprehensive and holistic approach to both repealing it and replacing it.  And we’re aware of that.  We’re working with the House and the Senate to make that happen.
Q    And my second topic.
MR. SPICER:  Of course.
Q    All right.  The immigration executive order, the travel ban -- is the President going to address the American people and Congress in his speech tomorrow night and specifically describe and defend the immigration ban?  And when will we see the revised executive order?
MR. SPICER:  So we’re not going to -- I would not anticipate the speech being a defense of legislation and executive orders.  I don’t think many previous Presidents have gotten through and used that as a legislative walkthrough.  
But you will hear about his commitment to immigration and his desire for border security, and what it means not just about keeping the nation safe, but what impact it’s having on the economy.  So you will hear a lot about immigration tomorrow night, and he will talk about why it matters and the goal that we have and why we should come together on areas like this.
Q    Can I follow up on that, Sean?
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  Katelyn.
Q    Where’s the next order?
MR. SPICER:  Oh, I’m sorry.  The next order I think we should have it out probably middle of this week.  Looking towards the middle of the week.  And we’ll have further updates as we get through the schedule.  I think obviously our priority right now today was the really get the budget process kicked off, and then continue to prepare for the joint session.
Katelyn.
Q    Thank you.
Q    Sean, can I follow on that?
MR. SPICER:  You will in a second.
Q    An internal report in 2015 identified $125 billion in wasteful Pentagon spending.  So how can you justify adding $54 billion to the defense budget?  Is that going to go to hiring soldiers or bureaucrats or contractors?  And is the President concerned with wasteful spending at the DOD?
MR. SPICER:  Of course he’s concerned.  He’s concerned with wasteful spending throughout the government.  But I think there’s also a big difference between rooting out waste and fraud in various programs and offices, and understanding that when you’re talking about adding to the fleet or increasing airplane costs, that that can’t be driven just through those.  And the commitment that you have to make to purchase some of those very-needed upgrades to our infrastructure and to our arsenal and to planes and ships doesn’t just come through that.  Because even if you could start to really identify, you really wouldn’t be able to make the financial commitment that needs to be done to rebuild some of the ships and planes in particular that need a substantial investment on the front end.
John.
Q    If I could just follow on Alexis’s question.  The 9th Circuit Court of Appeals has just denied your request to suspend proceedings in regard to the initial executive order.  That order came out just within the last few minutes.  So do you plan to continue defending your first executive order in court?  And what’s the purpose of doing that as opposed to simply rescinding it and then rendering that case moot?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I haven’t been able to read my phone while this has happened.  So I --
Q    That's why I read --
MR. SPICER:  (Laughter.)  Thank you, I appreciate it.  So with all due respect, I would ask that I be able to get back to you tomorrow on that after we consult with the Counsel’s Office and go through the briefing and the -- excuse me, the reading of what the court has said.  But give me a little time, let me get off the podium -- 
Q    I mean, the rescinding it question still stands, regardless of the --
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, and I think that the President has made a commitment right now to continue to defend what we did. 
Q    For what reason?
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  Because this is the strategy that -- he believes that we have the authority vested in U.S. code.  I’ve talked about this extensively in the past.  And I think that if you’ll allow me, once we get done with the briefing, I will follow up with the Counsel’s Office.
Q    But the point that some of us are trying to understand is, if you have a new executive order that you believe addresses the concerns of the many courts who have weighed in on this, why continue to defend an executive order that --  
MR. SPICER:  Because he’s -- I mean, because we were right the first time.  And I think that -- 
Q    Are you trying to prove a point?
MR. SPICER:  Hold on -- no, but I think that it’s not a question of proving a point.  It’s that the manner in which it was done in the first place was what we believe and continue to believe was the right way to address this problem. 
And while the second executive order attempts to address the court’s concerns that they made, the goal is obviously to maintain the way that we did it the first time because we believe that the law is very clear about giving the President the authority that he needs to protect the country. 
So just dropping that is not necessarily the most prudent thing.  And I think part of it is for us to recoup right now, figure out what the court has said, and then reassess the strategy.  But I don't want to get ahead, as you point out, you're reading it to me now -- I would like the opportunity to maybe go read it and actually have a lawyer read it -- since that won’t do very much.
Go ahead.
Q    Sean, thank you.  On anti-Semitism, that was a good, strong statement.  Is there anything that the federal government can do to protect Jewish institutions?  Are there any leads who is doing this?  And also on sequester, when can sequester be lifted?
MR. SPICER:  When can it be lifted?
Q    Yes.
MR. SPICER:  I think we've got to go through the process to lift the sequester, and so we’ll deal with that. 
With respect to some of the activity that we've seen at Jewish cemeteries in particular -- look, I think we have to work with law enforcement at a local and state level.  I’ll leave it to the Department of Justice to comment further on what additional steps can be made.  But I think -- as has been pointed out multiple times, I think one of the things that we can do is speak from this podium, in particular, and other places to make sure that every American understands what our values are, and that that kind of behavior and activity is wrong and won’t be tolerated, and the highest levels of government denounce it.
So I think it starts at that.  And then I think there’s a law enforcement component that I would ask you to touch base with.
Q    Sean, two on the budget.  
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    I understand this is a blueprint.  I understand the President has previously said he doesn't want to touch entitlements.  But why does he think it’s the right move to break with years of Republican orthodoxy, House Speaker Paul Ryan, who have said that any sensible long-term budget needs to include entitlement reform?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I’m just going to -- I think the President understands the commitment that was made to seniors in particular and that it's a sacred bond and a trust.
And I think -- look, Mara asked this earlier -- I think let me get back to you on the specifics.  But I think he made a commitment to the American people.  And one of the things that I think the President continues to get high marks on is that regardless of whether you voted for him or not, or you agree with his policies, he’s a man of his word.  And he has followed up on the promises that he made to the American people.  And I think that's important.
Now, again, I think that we will continue to work with Congress.  But the President understands that we have commitments that we've made on the entitlement side, in particular, and especially on the senior side with respect to Social Security that need to be maintained.  And so he’s going to keep this word to the American people.  
Q    But if you talk to some economic analysts, they say Social Security, Medicare won’t be there in a number of years if we don't address the fundamental problems.
MR. SPICER:  And I think that -- right.  And so for right now, I think the budget that we're laying out deals on the discretionary side.  You've heard the President’s priorities and commitment, especially when it comes to protecting this country.  And if we have anything further, I’ll let you know. 
Q    And one more -- Sean, one more.  Is there an internal leak inquiry right now?
MR. SPICER:  Not that I’m aware of.
Q    Thank you very much, Sean.  I have two questions on U.S.-China relationship, if I may.
MR. SPICER:  You may.
Q    Thank you.
MR. SPICER:  Everyone else gets two.
Q    First of all, since President Trump took office, China sends it very first senior official, State Counselor Yang Jiechi, to visit Washington, D.C. today.  Will there will be a meeting with in the White House, and what’s the White House’s expectation of his visit?
MR. SPICER:  So the State Counselor, and for those of you not schooled in the Chinese government, is basically the equivalent of our NSA Director -- NSC Director, correct?  
Q    Yes.
MR. SPICER:  So the Ambassador and the State Counselor came today.  They had a meeting with H.R. McMaster, Jared Kushner, and I think some others sat in on the meeting.  They had a delegation of six people here.  After the meeting ended, I believe the State Counselor was taken and had an opportunity to say hi to the President before he left.  This is an opportunity to begin that conversation and talk to them on shared interests of national security.
Q    Sean --
MR. SPICER:  Sorry, hold on.  He gets one more.  Everybody else did.  
Q    Can I have a follow up?
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, hold on, hold on.  Let me just -- everybody else got two.
Q    Yes, just this morning, President Trump mentioned about his pick for ambassador to China, Governor --
MR. SPICER:  Branstad.
Q    Branstad.  Governor Branstad apparently has a really positive view on China.  
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.
Q    So how confident the President is on the Governor’s confirmation to get all the support in the Senate? 
MR. SPICER:  Oh, I think he’ll receive tremendous support -- bipartisan support.  Governor Branstad has been -- is a true -- he has huge ties on both sides.  I think he’s one of the longest serving governors ever, definitely in Iowa.  And I think that he has tremendous respect from both sides of the aisle not just for how he’s handled himself as a governor in Iowa, but his deep understanding and ties to China and to China’s economy and to Chinese officials.  And I think he’s going to do a phenomenal job representing our nation. 
He starts with a deep understanding of the Chinese economy, the Chinese government, and that is going to really serve our nation well.
Mara.
Q    Can I just have a follow-up on China?  Thank you.  Because I know I got one before. 
MR. SPICER:  You did.  
Q    I appreciate that.  A lot of people voted for Donald Trump because they felt -- they agreed with him that the U.S. was getting ripped off by China.  And after the election, he made the call to Taiwan, which he was praised for.  Then he told Fox News -- he said, "I don't know why we have to be bound by a one-China policy unless we make a deal with China having to do with other things, including trade."  Then he reaffirmed the one-China policy.  So what did he get in return from China for doing that?
MR. SPICER:  Well, he had a conversation with President Xi.  I’m not going to get into the details of it.  But at the President’s -- President Xi’s request and after a discussion, the President reaffirmed the one-China policy.  The President is not one to discuss his negotiating tactics.  So I -- 
Q    But did he get something?  Can he assure the American people he got something? 
MR. SPICER:  The President always gets something.  Ryan.
Q    Well, what was it?  What was it?  
Q    Sean, two quick follow-ups.  First of all, I noticed earlier today there were a lot of Republican governors out here but not very many Democratic governors.  Is this administration actively attempting to reach out to the other side of the aisle for compromise?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.  I think if you saw the remarks during this pool opportunity, the President talked about some of the conversations he had with Governor McAuliffe in Virginia in particular.  But they were here last night, they had dinner with their wives and husbands.  It was an opportunity to really talk to the Cabinet and get to know each other and talk about priorities.
I will say that -- it’s interesting, I mentioned Obamacare.  When one of the things that was brought up by the governors -- and I’ve got to be honest, I wasn’t picking which governors and thinking of party -- but it came up over and over again that they actually -- several of them commented on how appreciative they have been in terms of seeking their input on not just healthcare but infrastructure and Medicaid, in particular, and other areas that fall into their thing -- to their wheelhouse.
So I think -- just so we’re clear, the dialogue that exists between this administration and this President and governors I think is a very refreshing move forward.
Q    And then my point -- a follow-up, a quick follow-up.  I want to clarify a little bit of something that happened Thursday and Friday about the “public enemy” statement.  Are you saying that all of the press is the public enemy?  People who didn’t vote for the President?  Just the people in this room, or -- is it just Bill Maher and maybe Warren Beatty?  Can you clarify what we’re talking about?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President made clear in his tweet that he was referring to the fake news and people who ascribe to pushing fake stories is where his target was.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  As you know, more than 60 Democrats either boycotted or skipped the President’s inauguration.  What kind of reception do you think the President will get tomorrow evening from Democrats in the House and Senate when he gives his joint address?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I hope a very robust and applause-filled reception.  The speech, as I mentioned, breaks down a lot of barriers that have traditionally been political barriers in terms of areas where I think we should find agreement that reaffirm the President’s desire to unite the country and unite our parties in areas of shared common ground.
And I think the things that he’s talking about -- increasing the support to our military, our veterans; helping children get an education -- those are things that hopefully we can all come together and think are shared American values, regardless of party.  I hope that we see a tremendous amount of support for the President and his policies and his vision tomorrow night.  He recognizes the problems that our nation faces, but he also charts a vision forward.  And I think it’s one that if people are honest, that they will agree that it really isn’t a political agenda as much as an agenda for this country and one to move us forward.
So I think that we’ll have to wait and see, but I can tell you that I think it will be a positive move forward.
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Couple follow-ups to Olivier’s question earlier about the ISIS review.  It’s day 30.  The memorandum the President signed 30 days ago said that he was supposed to be briefed.  Can you give us a more -- a timeline on when specifically President Trump will be involved -- I know you mentioned there’s a principals meeting earlier today -- what the timeline of the review is?  And then separately, you mentioned that Secretary Mattis was the one who’s presenting it to the principals committee.  The memorandum included things other than just the military; it included public diplomacy efforts to cut off financial ties to ISIS.  What were the other Cabinet secretaries involved?  What is sort of -- what got us here and where do we go from here?
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  Let me, if I may, get briefed on who and what occurred in the principals meeting to the extent that it’s available, and I’d be glad to get back to you tomorrow on that.  I just don’t have that information available.
Gabi.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Palm Beach County has said that it’s costing $60,000 a day in overtime pay every time the President comes to visit West Palm Beach.  He’s slated to go there again this weekend according to some reports.  Is the President taking any steps to ensure that taxpayers aren’t saddled with tremendous costs in his travel habits, considering he was so critical of his predecessor on that matter?
MR. SPICER:  Well, Gabi, the security for the President and the First Family is set by the Secret Service.  As you know, they determine the security measures that need to be taken to protect the President -- frankly, any President.  So I’m going to leave it up to the Secret Service to decide what security measures and steps are taken to protect the President.
And, as you know, I mean, this -- depending on -- it transcends administrations.  Wherever the President goes, they need to make sure that the President and the First Family is safe.  That’s something that I think -- we rely on the Secret Service to make those determinations.  They continue to do a phenomenal job making sure that the First Family and the President and the Vice President are protected, and we have full confidence in the decisions that they make.
So thank you guys very much.  We’ll have a briefing tomorrow -- later today on the state.
Q    Approximate time?
MR. SPICER:  What’s that?
Q    Approximate time?
MR. SPICER:  I would look in the 6 o'clock hour.  
Q    Here?
MR. SPICER:  Yes, here.
Q    After 6:00?
MR. SPICER:  I get to see you here again.  I would plan on around 6:00.  We’ll have further guidance.  And I don’t anticipate it being long.  I think we’re just going to walk through the -- off camera.  We’ll walk through the themes of the speech, take any questions, and then try to get some additional information, depending on where the President is in his read-through.
Q    No briefing tomorrow, right?
MR. SPICER:  No briefing tomorrow.  If you don’t want one, you don’t have to have one.
Q    You said you’d get back to us on a couple of issues tomorrow.
MR. SPICER:  Well, I’m -- it’s April that brought up no briefing.  If you guys want to vote --
Q    No, no, no, but tradition is there’s no briefing on -- that’s why I’m asking.
MR. SPICER:  I know.  We will do something for you, I promise.  We will make sure we get back --
Q    Is it going to be a gaggle like last Friday, or is it going to be --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, we will get back to you.  I’m sure you’ll see my face here tomorrow.  Thank you very much.  I’ll see you guys tomorrow.
END
Press Gaggle by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 3/1/2017
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
11:40 A.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Hi, guys.  I'm going to try to keep this relatively short.  We got a few things going on today, and I know that the pool has got to get out to do a spray at some point soon with the lunch.  
So, obviously, last night was a big night for the President and for everyone here at the White House.  The President delivered a powerful statement to Congress, to Americans, and the world last night.  It was an optimistic, forward-looking message of unity, strength, straight from his heart.  The President was proud to stand before the American people last night and present his roadmap for a renewal of the American spirit.  He honestly and -- he honestly acknowledged the undeniable challenges that we face, but continually reminded us there's no challenge facing this country that we can't meet if we join together.
The American spirit has already proven itself against seemingly insurmountable odds, and we'll do it again under the leadership of this President.
Republicans and Democrats may be divided on policies, but we're also united in our mission to achieve peace and prosperity for every American citizen.  The President has obviously been humbled by the great reception that the -- the reception that his address received.  Today, the President is holding a series of meetings with White House staff, congressional leaders, and others to drive the goals that he laid out last night.
He'll host shortly a leadership lunch with House and Senate Republican leadership.  The attendees will include the Vice President, Leader McConnell, Speaker Ryan, Senator Cornyn, Leader McCarthy, Congressman Scalise, Senator Gardiner and Senator Perdue.
Last night's address clearly generated a lot of momentum, and the President is anxious to continue working on an ambitious legislative agenda.  During his speech last night, the President mentioned policies in key areas, from urban renewal to trade reform, where too many leading agencies and departments in charge of implementing are still waiting on their confirmed leaders.  
The President was pleased, obviously, to see that Ryan Zinke was confirmed as the Secretary of the Interior by the Senate just a short time ago.  So the confirmation process is now coming to an end for him, and start to get the work going.   
As the President mentioned in last night's remarks -- and, by the way, one quick note, we'll have an update on his swearing-in hopefully soon.  As the President mentioned in last night's remarks, he's calling on Congress to repeal Obamacare and replace it with a patient-focused system that expands options, lowers costs, and improves healthcare outcomes for all Americans.  He's ready to restart the honest engine -- to restart the engine of the American economy, which means tax reform that brings down rates for the middle class and simplifies the tax code, a robust infrastructure program and a budget that puts the interests of American people first.  
The President and congressional leaders will work together today to continue to chart a path forward on those issues and more.  Also, today, Judge Neil Gorsuch will be back up on the Hill meeting with seven senators, including Senators Booker, Sanders, Barrasso and Kaine.  And lastly, this evening, the President will have dinner with Secretary Tillerson.
Looking ahead, I know Sarah was kind enough to come brief you yesterday about the President's trip to Hampton Roads tomorrow.  I'll have a few more details for you on that.  The President is looking forward to meeting with the members of the Navy and some of the sailors down there, the shipbuilders, including the lead shipbuilder of the USS Gerald Ford and the ship's commander, before giving remarks on deck to a group of shipbuilders and sailors.
On Friday, the President will be in Orlando, Florida for a series of important events highlighting his educational agenda.  He'll be visiting St. Andrews Catholic School, where I think you can expect him to drop in on a few lucky classrooms, as well as meeting with parents, teachers, and administrators.  Education, as was noted last night from the President, is a top priority.  He has said many times before that education has the ability to level the playing field for the next generation.  Obviously, last night he noted that he believes this is the civil rights issue of this generation.  He is determined to provide choice for every parent, and opportunities for every child, regardless of their zip code.  I expect he will be speaking with the parents and teachers and administrators at St. Andrews on his upcoming plans for reaching that goal.
And finally, I want to note that the President is monitoring the situation in the Midwest, where a string of tornadoes is devastating several states with more severe weather predicted for the coming states -- for the coming days.  Three lives have already been tragically cut short.  The families of those victims and also those who have had their homes and property destroyed are in the President's thoughts and prayers.  The millions of people in the path of severe weather will be at the top of his mind over the next few days.  He implores everyone to follow the directions of emergency services and stay inside, and obviously will continue to be in contact with state and local officials to provide the necessary federal support that is required.
With that, I'm glad to take some questions.
Q    On the lunch today, was it always --
MR. SPICER:  John Roberts.  (Laughter.)  
Q    -- was it always just going to be Republican leadership?  Were the Democrats ever invited?  Will he meet with the Democrats?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I'm sure he will.  And you've seen he's met with a bipartisan group of Senate leaders last week.  He met with a bipartisan group of attorney general yesterday.  He met with the bipartisan group of governors.  I mean, just to be factual here, at some point, the people who set the agenda and the timetable to enact his agenda are Republican, and so there's a difference between meeting with both sides of the aisle, and I think he has pretty well shown a desire to reach across the aisle in the last month.  But this is about actually charting out the agenda and the timeline, and that’s why it’s both groups.  But yeah, I think you'll continue to see not just -- in the next week, not just leadership but rank-and-file members of the House and the Senate with that aim.
Q    Sean, the Dow Jones crossed 21,000 for the first time today.
MR. SPICER:  It did.
Q    Does the White House believe that that’s a reaction to the President’s speech last night?
MR. SPICER:  (Laughter.)  Look, I’m not an economist.  I don’t want to -- I know the Dow goes up and down, as well as the other indexes, and I don’t want to get in the habit of commenting every time the Dow hits.  But I think that you’ve seen a sustained economic boon since the President was elected.  He commented on it last night.  
I think you’re seeing not just the Dow react, but manufacturers, business leaders, folks from small and large companies talk about it.  And I think that there is a renewed sense of wanting to business, and of economic growth and optimism.  You’ve seen it in not just in the indexes on a day-to-day basis as they go up and down, but also in the confidence numbers that show that there is a continued growth in the confidence in our economy and our market and our policies.  
Look, I don’t want to tie a direct link.  I think that that’s -- you know, we could go back and forth every day about where the market stands at any given time in a day.  But I would have to believe that when you talk to a lot of economists, they -- and frankly, not just the economists who look at it academically and try to parse it, but when you talk to these company CEOs and leaders that he’s talking to, there is a renewed sense of confidence in their country, in the agenda, in the desire to hire and grow and expand in the United States, and I can only see that as a positive sign, not just for the market, but for our entire economy.
Q    How long -- to follow up on that -- how long does the President think he can wait in order to provide specifics on tax reform and Obamacare and the others before we start to lose that sense of momentum and confidence that you’re talking about in the markets?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think it’s not just those pieces.  Obviously, it’s bigger than just that.  But I think that, with respect to Obamacare, he's talked about the next few weeks having something out there, and then same with tax reform.  And I think both of those things that we'll be working with the Hill.  Secretary Mnuchin mentioned the other day that hopefully having a tax plan done by (inaudible).
But both of those, specifically, are massive undertakings.  And the idea that they are going to be done in two seconds is a little bit of a fallacy, and I think that we’ve given folks updates and guidelines as far as when we see this thing moving.  And I think that that’s a pretty good guide of where we go.
Jim Stinson.
Q    Sean, Governor Beshear said on Morning Joe today -- I’m paraphrasing -- that people are going to die if GOP healthcare plans more forward.  What does the administration say to Democrats suggesting Obamacare repeal will cost American lives?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I would suggest to the former governor that, when you look at where Obamacare stands right now -- I think I’ve mentioned this before, Jim -- but more and more people are facing higher and higher premiums.  People are choosing to opt out of the exchange and pay the penalty.  It is collapsing on its own.
And I don’t -- I think that that’s a bit extreme.  The reality is that more people are having problems right now.  They’re losing their doctor.  They’re losing the plan that they liked.  I’d like him to defend -- I mean, I read to you guys two days ago Nancy Pelosi’s own definition of success for Obamacare.  They had three prongs for that, and they failed on all three of them.
So Governor Beshear -- you know, the President last night extended an olive branch to Democrats and Republicans to work with him on a plan that actually achieves the goals that were laid out.  That’s what he should -- if he wants to be focused, it’s not just former governors, but I think current governors were here to talk about what they want.  And so I know Governor Bevin, the current governor of Kentucky, has noted the concerns that Obamacare has in Kentucky now.  And I think those are the challenges and problems that the President is seeking to fix on this.
The reality is, is that we have to have a healthcare system that Americans can afford, that give them choice, that have doctors that can deal with the problems they have.  And that's what we're working with Congress on right now is to get that kind of a plan in place.
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  One brief question.
MR. SPICER:  Wow.  (Laughter.)
Q    Senator Schumer, the Minority Leader, has said that the President is stalling on one of the pivotal points of his agenda -- infrastructure -- where he could work with Democrats.  What's the administration's response to Senator Schumer?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think first and foremost, I'm glad to see that he has finally found one area that he's willing to work with the President on.  I know that multiple times this morning he was offered an opportunity on various shows to talk about things that he thought they could work with on the -- with the President.  And I think it took -- in particular, I saw the exchange on NBC and it was somewhat disappointing that when you look at all the things that the President said that I think offered an olive branch to both parties and seemingly should unify the country on issues and on goals, that it's nice to finally hear that we found one.  Because I think there were a lot of areas in that speech last night that transcended party lines and ideology, and that united us all as Americans.
With respect to infrastructure, I think the President noted last night that we're going to continue to see a plan evolve that's really structured in a private partner financing mechanism that will continue to move forward.  But whether it's our roads or bridges, our airports, air traffic control, there is an infrastructure piece of our nation that is so vital to the way we do life.  And not just that, but -- not just the building itself and the construction of it, but those roads are what -- are the byway and the pathway to so much of our economic commerce today.  And doing them not only is good for the jobs that they will create on the projects, but allowing us to have -- allowing products to get to market and consumers to get to business, et cetera, is actually a magnifying event for that.
Q    Sean, I'm just looking for some clarification on your comments from the last week about the administration's stance on recreational marijuana.  During the campaign, the President had said that this is a states' rights issue.  Is this still where he believes this issue should flow, or does he believe it's a federal -- 
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think, Trey, there is a specific carve-out in the appropriations for medical marijuana.  And I think the President understands that that can be a vital part of treatment, especially for terminally ill patients and people facing certain kinds of medical things.  But there is a -- I think I was very -- I'm sorry if I wasn't, but I think I was clear that there is a big difference between the medical and the non-medical.
Margaret.
Q    Sean, two things on the speech.  The President talked about robust engagement when he was talking about foreign policy.  But at the same time, the White House is talking about cutting foreign aid by a large amount.  How do you track those two things?
MR. SPICER:  Well, because you can have engagement -- I mean, I don't know that -- 
Q    Like, who is going to be doing the diplomacy if you're cutting the State Department funding?
MR. SPICER:  I mean, who is going to be doing it?  There's people that do --  
Q    Who is the lead on foreign policy?  Is it the White House or the State Department?    
MR. SPICER:  Secretary of State.
Q    It is the Secretary of State?
MR. SPICER:  Of course, it is.  I mean, look, the President obviously guides our foreign policy in terms of who implements it, whether it's -- if you talk about healthcare, it's going to be the Secretary of Health and Human Services.  If it's on trade, it's going to be the USTR.  I mean, so it's pretty clear that the Secretary of State implements the President's foreign policy agenda.
Q    Right, but more robust versus cutting.  They sound contradictory -- 
MR. SPICER:  But, again, I think this is a very Washington trap.  Just because dollars do not decide engagement -- I think one of the things that's fascinating is that as the President has talked to all of these foreign leaders -- I don't know in a single case -- and, again, I can't say I've been on every call -- but I can't think of -- maybe one or two or something, because again, I don't want to get in a trap of trying to -- but I cannot say in most cases, at least, that I've heard direct aid being a discussion that has come up.
In fact, what I hear more often is:  "Gosh, we haven’t heard from the United States in a long time.  We haven’t had you engage in issues of concern with us.  We haven’t talked about trade.  We haven’t talked about other issues of bilateral concern."  I think that's what a robust, healthy, bilateral relationship with a country is about.
I think it is a very Washington-centered argument to literally tie dollars to any program or any type of engagement -- to say something is robust by the dollar figure is something that is a very Washington answer.  But I think that you can look at dollars that have gotten to a lot of countries.  And when we ask them, what's your relationship been with the United States?  They’ll say, we haven’t had much engagement at all with the United States in a while.
Anita.
Q    Sorry, I had a second question -- 
MR. SPICER:  John tried to start something; it just didn't continue.  (Laughter.) 
Q    In the speech last night, while the President talked about support for vets and support for military, he didn't talk about the 9,000 troops in Afghanistan, the 5,000 in Iraq, the hundreds of operators on the ground in Syria.  Was there a reason that he didn't lay out his vision for foreign policy in those active war zones?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, I think you could probably go through and say, he also didn't talk about this or that.  He talked about his --
Q    The world is watching, and those are clear --
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  But you can go through a lot of hotspots that we have in a country.  I think when it comes to the military itself, he was very clear about his commitment to the military, his desire to fund the military, give them the infrastructure that it needs.  It’s why he’s going to go to Hampton Roads tomorrow to talk about the investment that needs to get made.  He talked about veterans and caring for the folks.  
So I understand your question.  But I think at some point you can literally go through all of the other areas that may not have come up on domestic and foreign policy, other nations that didn't get a mention, or a hotspot that didn't get up. 
But I think in terms of his commitment to the country, his commitment to defeating ISIS, he did bring that up.  He talked about the plan that he wants to have, the engagement that he’s having with the Joint Chiefs in the military, the funding that he wants to lend them.  
So I get that you can parse out something and say, "but he didn't bring up this exact thing."  There’s a lot of things that may or may not have come up last night, and that doesn't necessarily mean he didn't have the commitment to it.
Q    He wasn’t deemphasizing foreign policy?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think he talked about ISIS.  He talked about the military.  He talked about it.  So I don't have --
Anita.
Q    It will not surprise you that I have two questions.  The first one is quick.  
MR. SPICER:  I think for Lent everyone needs to give up two questions.  (Laughter.)  Or maybe I could at least give up answering two questions.  (Laughter.) 
Q    I’ll make the first one quick, so how about that?  Can you update us on where we are on the executive order regarding vetting?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, as I said, we would have an announcement at some point scheduling-wise.  When we have one, we’ll announce it.  I think the President, as I mentioned a couple days ago, the issue for us has been a continued desire to share with the departments and agencies the ability to implement this, and we continue to do that.  When we have a schedule to announce --
Q    When do you think -- 
MR. SPICER:  I’ve not -- I’ve learned not to put days on things, because until we announce it, it’s much like we've talked about all the executive orders, with all the personnel announcements.  When the President is ready to make a decision, he lets us know and we let you know.  So we're not there yet.
Q    The second question -- can you tell us a little bit about the back story with Carryn Owens being there yesterday?  She wasn’t on the list you all sent out.  When did the President talk to her?  When did that happen?  When was she invited?  Why wasn’t she on the official list?  And did they have a chance to visit beforehand?
MR. SPICER:  Okay, I'll take these in order.  She was invited on January 30th.  In the condolence call to her, the President invited her and her three children to the White House.  And during that call, said, "You know, by the way, I'm going to be giving this speech in February.  If you would feel comfortable, I would love to have you as a guest."  He asked if she'd like to bring the kids at that time.  It was obviously a very raw and emotional time for her, and she said that's -- she appreciated the invitation, she would love to take him up on it, would get back to us.  The President asked the military aide in the room at the time to follow up with her.  She accepted the invitation.  So she and her three children came to the White House yesterday, met with the President prior to the speech, and they had a time to visit before and then after, obviously.  
Why she wasn’t on the guidance:  We had a conversation with her prior, and just said, you know, I know this is an emotional time for you.  Respectfully to you guys, we knew that if we had released her name, that there would be a lot of media attention to her and her family.  And we spoke to her before we put out the guest guidance and just said, would you rather us wait and hold?  So we made a decision at the time that this was a very raw and emotional time for her, and we didn’t -- we worked with her to decide what would be in her best interest and her family's best interest at this time.  
Q    Were the children there?
MR. SPICER:  No, they were not there.
Q    But her parents were there, correct?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    But the children were in town --
MR. SPICER:  The children were in town.  They visited the White House.  They had an opportunity to visit the Navy Mess, have lunch, go up and see -- and so the President got to see them.  And they got a tour of the White House.
Q    Was there some special interaction with Ivanka, because she was sitting next to her?  Or it just happened to be where she sat?
MR. SPICER:  They met obviously over -- and obviously after -- at the end of the evening, the President brought them into the room where he was holding, and everybody, including the First Lady, had a chance to talk to her and her family, and mother and father.  But, as I said, this was something that was extended -- the invitation was extended to her on the 30th of January when the President made that first call to her.  
And again, just respectfully in terms of the follow-up, I know there's been a lot of interest in her, in Carryn.  And we have -- our goal was to make sure that we respected her wishes and her privacy.  And again, even with referencing her in the speech, that was her decision.  We asked her -- the President would like to raise this.  And she said, I'd like that.  And so that was coordinated with her in terms of how public she wanted to be and how acknowledged she wanted her and Ryan to be as well.  
Q    I just thought I'd bring this up so you could respond to it.  You must have seen the criticism of her being there and the President mentioning her.  And people are saying it's a photo-op.  So since you're talking about it, do you want to respond to that, that it's a way to --
MR. SPICER:  I think that that's -- I mean, again, he invited her on January 30th and extended an invitation.  I don’t -- it was she who accepted the invitation.  I think she has a right to honor the legacy and sacrifice of her husband.  And I think -- I've been in this town 25 years, probably watched State of the Unions for 30 -- which doesn’t say a lot -- (laughter) -- for my viewing habits -- but I've never seen a sustained applause like that.  And I think that you can say what you want about a lot of the policies, but I hope to God that everybody in America could literally say that that's the country that we live in, that you honor and support, not just Ryan's sacrifice, but her -- what she's going to go through and what those children are going to go through. 
It was amazing -- I got a chance to talk to the kids yesterday and see them so -- you know, they're kids, they were happy, they were running around.  I don’t know that they fully appreciate the sacrifice that their father has made.  But I just -- I'm not going to -- if that's the criticism that people that, they have a right to in this country.  But I would also suggest that we have the right to honor the people who have served this nation and the sacrifice that the families make of those who serve.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  There were some quotes floating around last night from anonymous administration officials saying --
MR. SPICER:  What?  (Laughter.)  
Q    What a surprise, right?  (Laughter.)  That part of the reason for the postponement of the announcement of the new travel ban was the positive reception of the speech, and that the administration wants the new executive order to "have its own moment."  Was the speech perception part of the reason --
MR. SPICER:  I will just refer you back to what I said to Anita's first question.  We hadn’t made an announcement.  And I think that -- again, this gets back to personnel announcements, executive order announcements, other things.  Until they're on the schedule, that doesn’t make them official.  And that's the point of making the announcement, is that we say this is where we're going and this is what we're doing.  We try to provide you guys guidance.  Obviously, there's a reason that we don’t -- because sometimes things aren’t ready, sometimes we want to make -- the President hasn’t made up his final mind about executing something, or he wants to add something in.  It's the same thing with the speech yesterday.  I mean, we worked up until game time because the President wanted to continue to work on it. 
But when we have announcements to make, we'll make them.  Until we do, then it's not final.  
Mara.
Q    Thank you.  I have two really short questions.  The first one on the travel ban.  The first request was for 90 days so that you could develop the new vetting regime.  Thirty days have passed.  I assume that means you're 30 days into this process.  Does that mean that the next travel ban will ask for just the remaining time of the 90 days?
MR. SPICER:  Respectfully, I'm not -- this goes back to the last couple.  I'm not going to start getting into discussions of an executive order that hasn’t been announced yet.  So to start talking about the specifics of something that I'm not even going to talk about the schedule of -- I'll give you credit for the try.
Q    Okay, that's fair.  My next question is on taxes.  He talked about massive tax cuts for the middle class.  Your Treasury Secretary at one point said there would be no absolute cut for the wealthy.  What does that mean?
MR. SPICER:  It means that I think the focus is on the middle class.  I think there's two things that are going to be highlighted in the tax reform.  One is to make our companies and corporations and businesses more competitive so that they stay in this country and hire more people.  I mean, that's -- 
Q    Right, I'm talking individuals.
MR. SPICER:  I know, I know.  But what I'm saying is that there's two big components are going to drive tax reform -- that being one to help companies hire more people.  And then two is the focus on the individual side of the ledger is going to be on middle-income tax relief.  And so I think that's what Secretary Mnuchin was referring to.
Q    But are you saying that a wealthy person will not get a larger -- in terms of percentage -- tax cut than a middle-class person?  I mean, is that how you're measuring it?
MR. SPICER:  Again, all I'm going to do is stick at the high level now and say that the principle that's guiding this is middle-class tax relief.  So I'm not going to get into deciding all this yet.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  A lot has been made about the President's tone, his demeanor last night in his address to Congress in the sense that some people are describing it as very presidential; we haven't seen this side of President Trump in the early days of his presidency.  Was this a one-off?  Is this something we can expect from the President more often?  For instance, tomorrow he is traveling down to the Newport News, Virginia area.  Will we see the President Trump that we saw last night in his address to Congress, or more like the campaign-style rally that we saw down in Florida, which took place a few weeks ago?
MR. SPICER:  I think the Vice President said it best this morning.  I mean, this is the President Trump, the candidate Trump, the President-elect Trump that I've known.  And I think sometimes -- so I respectfully disagree in the sense that I think that the folks around him who have known him, who have gotten to know him, this is something that you see on a regular basis.  And I think we're going to continue to see this.  
I think more and more -- one of the programs this morning noted that people who have been around him for a long time, this is who he is.  I think he's talked about this a lot, and I know sometimes you pull random clips, but this is who he is.  And I don't necessarily subscribe to are we going to see more or less of this.  He cares about this country, he's got a big heart, he wants America to succeed, he wants America to be safe, he wants more Americans to get back to work.  And I think you're going to hear him talk about that over and over again.
Blake.
Q    Sean, the trade document that's out there, which suggests that the administration may take a position that would potentially ignore or look past WTO rulings.  Is there any truth to this?  
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    What is the position?
MR. SPICER:  Again, I would just argue, look, we're a member of the WTO, we don't have a USTR in place yet.  So to suggest that we're going to take any kind of trade policies -- I think, obviously, we've got some concerns with the percentage of dispute resolutions that are brought to the WTO versus other nations.  But I would just -- that's sort of a fact in terms of the percentage of cases that get brought to dispute resolution at the USTR -- or, excuse me, at the WTO against the United States.  But we don't have a U.S. Trade Representative, so I would say that that's not -- 
Q    Like a working --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no.  I mean, it's not even a working. That's not -- full stop -- that is not our policy and that's not where we're going.
Yes.
Q    Sean, this is a follow-up on the -- from the heart.  Was the President's softening of his immigration stand one from the heart or one from the political handbook?  Let's put it that way.  And did you get ashes this morning?
MR. SPICER:  Well, as soon as -- I mean, not that I’m a big fan of sharing, but I will be going to get my ashes later in a little bit.  So --
Q    (Inaudible.) 
MR. SPICER:  I appreciate that.  I will (inaudible) in mass, and I’ll let my mom know that you appreciate that, and my parish priest.  (Laughter.) 
Q    -- might be able to see you -- 
MR. SPICER:  I try to keep a little bit of the church and state out of this.
Q    Do you have a confession?
MR. SPICER:  Huh?
Q    Do you a have a confession while you're up there?  (Laughter.) 
MR. SPICER:  There’s three parts to Lent:  alms giving, penance, and prayer.  And I will make sure that I spend all 40 --
Q    Can you answer the first part of the question?
MR. SPICER:  No, I’m good with -- I’m sorry I got lost in my faith.  (Laughter.) 
Q    The President’s softening --
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, thank you.  Look, I don’t know that I would agree.  Look, the President’s comments yesterday that were that, if we can get a bill, he would like to get that done.  I think he -- in the conversation that he was having with network anchors, he talked about the fact -- and, frankly, one of the anchors said, if anyone can get a deal, it would be you.  Obviously, he was pleased with that because it’s true.  And I think he recognizes that a solution, a comprehensive solution has eluded our nation for a long time, and it’s a big problem.  And if he can get it, consistent with his principles, he will.  And I think he made that clear, and the full context of those comments are just that, and in the speech he commented on as well.
And I think there’s a difference between sacrificing your principles to get a deal, and working with others, consistent with your principles to get a deal.  And I think his principles remain consistent, and he understands that the benefit of actually enacting a comprehensive solution to a big problem that we face in the country, I think that’s kind of where his head is at.
Zeke.
Q    Thank you, Sean.
MR. SPICER:  I’m sorry.  Go ahead, Zeke.
Q    Okay.  Two for you.  First, following up on Monday, the ISIS review -- the status of the review process -- who was involved and what is being (inaudible)?  The President -- who else is being looped into the process?
MR. SPICER:  I’m sorry, I owed you that, and I will get back to you.  The principals committee did meet.  General Mattis shared his outline and ideas and comments, and he got a lot of feedback from the principals committee.  And remember, that’s -- and I’d need to get Michael to get back with you on that.  I owe you that, and my apologies.  I’ll add it to my confession.  (Laughter.) 
Q    And then the second is, just following the President's line of speech last night about “the time for trivial fights is behind us” -- does the President believe that he has also sometimes engaged in some of these trivial fights?  And going forward, should we be expecting less of these fights from him with all sorts of people?
MR. SPICER:  I’m going to let -- the President’s vision and words last night should stand for themselves.  I think he was very clear in terms of what he expects from the country.  
Jessica.
Q    The President talked about merit-based immigration last night.  Can you talk a little bit more about what that means, and whether that indicates a desire to change legal immigration from a focus on family reunification to some sort of making sure they have a job in the United States?  And was he also trying to imply that we don’t have a merit-based immigration system?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think he was -- look, I would just refer you back to what he said.  I mean, you’ve got countries like Canada and Australia, in particular, that have a true merit-based system, and I think he was making it clear that we currently don’t necessarily -- the results of our immigration system don’t yield, necessarily, one that reflects a merit-based one.
But I will say that there was, I think, a very substantial case that he made in terms of merit-based -- what he wants and how he wants to get there.
Jeremy.
Q    Can I have a second?  I was going to have a second question.
MR. SPICER:  I’m sorry.
Q    The President also had a comment about how many factories have left the United States since China joined the WTO.  Last night his number was 60,000.  A week ago, on February 23rd, he used the figure of 70,000.  Just wondering what the genesis of the figure is, and what the White House believes to be the number of factories.  And also whether it is truly attributable to China joining the WTO or other factors, as well.
MR. SPICER:  I’m going to -- we’ll get somebody to follow up with you on the cite for that, as well.
I went to Jeremy.
Q    Is the President considering the Pentagon and his Defense Secretary more authority to greenlight raids like the kind that we saw in Yemen?  And is that, in part, driven by the political blowback that that raid had initially?
And secondly, could you talk about -- the initial executive order on the travel ban called for a 30-day review period to see if they would -- you would add additional countries to the list of banned --
MR. SPICER:  I’ll take the second one first.  I can refer you back to Mara Liasson’s question.  (Laughter.)  
On the first part, I think that he has been very clear from the get-go.  He talked about some of the tactics used a while ago, and he said, I’m going to rely on General Mattis and his expertise.  And I think when it comes to national security, he’s got an amazing team by all standards -- whether it’s Secretary Mattis, Secretary Kelly, General McMaster.  There’s a whole host of these -- with General Kellogg.  And I think he’s always talked about he’s going to rely on his advisors to give him advice.
I think at the end of the day there are certain decisions that have to be signed off by the President.  And I would respectfully dispute the characterization of that, and I think we've pushed back and discussed this several times.  There is -- this raid and action and mission was one that I think we have detailed very, very closely -- or carefully -- about the timeline for this, and when it was signed off on, and by whom.  And it was initiated, signed off on by the previous administration in writing, with a signature to greenlight it.  And it was further reviewed and concurred under this administration that the same basis for greenlighting it back then stood.  
So, respectfully, the actual timeline and documentation does not support the accusation or the question that you're trying to ask.
Q    And just as far as this was -- is nothing going to change as far as who greenlights certain raids?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, I think legally -- Jeremy, I don't want to get into specifics because I think there is certain action that requires presidential sign-off.  And there’s certain action in terms of echelon -- the way the military works, you have different echelons that can be signed off on certain things.  And I think there are certain things that have to be signed off by the President of the United States.
Q    (Inaudible) protocol.
MR. SPICER:  So the protocol is not changing in terms of what has to be signed off, but I think that the President has made clear -- all that being said, he relies heavily on their input, their decision-making, their opinions, and their analysis and conclusions.  That's different.  And I think one of the issues that you saw -- or some of the criticism that you saw last administration was that you had a lot of the combatant commanders in particular who would say, we came to a conclusion, we made the case, and we weren't allowed to move forward.
That's where I think the nuance that you're asking actually lies, which is -- 
Q    Right, so is he making a change to address that criticism?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no.  I think his point -- it's a philosophy more than a sort of a change in policy, which is he believes that these are the experts in this field -- as he does with all of his Cabinet.  I mean, I think if you ask -- in terms of foreign policy interaction, he would say, okay, I chose Secretary Tillerson because I believe he's the right guy for this job; if Betsy DeVos has an educational matter that's going to come up.  He chose these highly qualified individuals because he believes in their expertise and understanding of the issues.
I think his point and his philosophy is, generally, if they come to him with a case and lay it out, then he is -- that is going to weigh heavily on his decision-making, whereas I think in the last administration, one of the major critiques was that they would come to them and then there was a preponderance -- the preponderance of time.  It would be, no, we're not going to move forward with this.  So I just want to be -- 
Phil.
Q    Sean, a lot of lawmakers were heartened by the speech last night and drew a contrast from the inaugural address 40 days prior, and said that the tone was very different, the substance was different, the olive branches and outreach.  Does the White House agree with that characterization?  Was it on purpose?  And if it was on purpose, what, over the course of those 40 days, inspired the course correction?
MR. SPICER:  It was not on purpose.  There is no -- I mean, one was an inaugural.  One was a joint address.  They're two different speeches, and I think that they serve two different purposes in terms of what you're trying to lay out.  I think the joint address serves as sort of a place hold for the State of the Union for first term -- or first year, first term.
Q    The way he communicated.
MR. SPICER:  I understand -- you're right.  And I think he wanted to lay out -- it's a much different and longer speech.  He had different sort of messaging objectives at each.  But I also dispute the notion on the inaugural.  Like, I mean, I think that when you actually look at the critique, people will look at four or five different lines.  But for the most part, for much -- the most part -- the high majority of that speech, he talked about the American people, the American worker, and the challenges that they face and where he thinks the country has kind of gotten off-track prioritizing them and his desire to put, what he called, the forgotten people back number one in line.  
And then so one was sort of -- that was laying out his sort of vision for the presidency.  This time I think it was much more of a laying out the policies of how he's going to achieve that.  And that's the purpose of a joint address.  So I just -- it's two different speeches, but I just don't agree with the characterization of the inaugural in the first place.
Q    Was there some conclusion, though, in the White House or by the President himself that that rhetorical approach early on in the presidency, that the tweets, that the speeches -- like he did at CPAC the other day, the fighting with the media -- that that was not helping and he needed to do something different?
MR. SPICER:  No.  No, no, there wasn't.  I just -- again, I think he -- and this particular speech was a very personal -- again, like, each speech, each speech has a different audience, a different objective.  And I think for this speech, he was very personal, he was very, very much him.  It was his work, it was his voice, it was his words, it was his edits, it was his suggestions.  
And then he had a team surrounded by him, including the Vice President, the chief of staff, Steve Miller, Steve Bannon, Jared, Ivanka was part of it.  There was a -- Kellyanne, Hope -- who he would bounce ideas and objectives off of.  But this was a Trump speech from his heart, as he said, that evolved over the course of the last 10 days or so.  And in the last 48 to 72 hours, really accelerated, got very crisp.  And it was up until about 12:15 -- excuse me, that's when I got home.  (Laughter.)  About 6:15 yesterday when we really started to get that real final point on it, because it was something that was very, very personal to him.  But I wouldn't conflate the two and try to compare one speech with another.  He looked at them as very different objectives in terms of how the speech. 
I need to run.
Q    But, Sean, was this a reset?  Was it a reset speech?
MR. SPICER:  No, it wasn't a reset speech.  I need to get on.  I've got some things I have to take care of.  But thank you.  We will, as I mentioned, expect a gaggle on the way down to Hampton Roads tomorrow, and we will see you later.
Thank you all.
END 
Press Gaggle by Press Secretary Sean Spicer
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
1:47 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Another quiet weekend.  (Laughter.)  
Q    You sure you don’t want to do this on camera?  (Laughter.)  
MR. SPICER:  The President signed a new executive order this morning that continues to protect the nation from terrorists entering into the United States, and a related presidential memorandum.  As we've always maintained, the executive order was fully lawful in the first place, and we would have won the related legal cases on the merits.  But rather than leave America’s security in limbo while the litigation dragged on, some estimates having that go up to potentially a year, the President acted to protect the national security by issuing a new executive order that addresses the court’s concerns, some of which merely involve clarifying the intent of the original executive order.
After reviewing the facts and in thorough consultation with the Cabinet, the President had concluded these actions are necessary to protect the United States from those who, unfortunately, wish to do us harm.
Two areas that I want to highlight in the executive order.  There will be a 90-day suspension of travel to the United States by nationals from Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen, during which time the Department of State and Homeland Security will conduct a review to determine how we can improve the screening process for foreign nationals seeking to enter the United States.  
These six countries have been previously identified by Congress and the Obama administration as presenting heightened concerns about terrorism.  Specifically, Iran, Sudan and Syria have been designated as state sponsors of terrorism.  Libya is an active combat zone where violent extremist groups thrive in ungoverned territory.  Portions of Somalia have been a safe haven for terrorist groups.  Most countries don't even recognize the Somali documents.  
Yemen is the site of an ongoing conflict between the government and Iran-backed armed opposition.  Both ISIS and al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula have exploited this conflict to expand their presence in Yemen and carry out hundreds of attacks.  
These governments simply cannot or not adequately supply satisfactory information about their own nationals.  In the absence of adequate information from these governments, the President has had to act to protect the security of the American people.
After the original executive order, Iraq’s government took steps to increase their cooperation with our immigration authorities and improve their vetting process, leading them to be removed from the list of countries covered by the temporary travel suspension.  We hope other countries will also take proactive action to ensure the security of all of our nations.
This is proof of both the need for and the effectiveness of the President’s actions.  There are a number of exceptions to this temporary travel suspension.  The order explicitly states that the suspension does not apply to, one, green card holders; two, foreign nationals currently in the U.S.; three, foreign nationals currently holding valid visas; four, foreign nationals who are dual citizens of a designated country traveling on a passport issued by a non-designated country; and last, foreign nationals who have been granted asylum or admitted as refugees previously.
There will also be a temporary 120-day suspension of the United States refugees’ admissions program.  More than 300 people who have entered the United States as refugees are currently the subjects of counterterrorism investigations by the FBI.  We must find a way to better screen refugee applicants to maintain the safety of our own communities.
This suspension will temporarily reduce the investigative burdens on the agencies that participate in our refugee program, allowing them to properly review and revise their standards and practices.
In regard to both of these provisions, the President places his full faith and trust in the experience and knowledge of his Secretary of State and his Secretary of Homeland Security.  This order makes it clear that they have broad authority to grant waivers based on their expert judgments.  This suspension does not apply to refugees already scheduled for travel by the Department of State, which is explicitly stated in the text of the executive order.  Additionally, this suspension does not treat Syrian refugees different than any other refugees.  It does not separately address the persecution of religious minorities, but does permit waivers in the cases of undue hardship.
This order was drafted in close consultation with the relevant agencies.  It also includes a delay-effective date of March 16th, giving those involved in its enforcement even more time to facilitate an orderly rollout.  
We welcome those who come to our country wishing to contribute and share in our nation’s prosperity and wellbeing, but we cannot allow our immigration system to become a vehicle for admitting people who intend to do us harm.  It is the President’s solemn duty to protect the American people, and President Trump has taken an important step in securing our borders through this order.
Moving on to today, the President had a full day of meetings with the Cabinet and members of his staff.  The President received his intelligence briefing this morning.  He had a call earlier with the Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu, where they discussed regional security challenges.  The Prime Minister thanked the President for his strong stance on anti-Semitism during his joint address to Congress last week.  
The President had lunch with the Vice President, and, as I’m speaking to you now, he is beginning a meeting with the Secretary of State.  Later today, he’ll have meetings with his National Economic Council and Secretary of Veterans Affairs Shulkin.  This evening, he’ll have dinner with OMD Director Mulvaney and Secretary of Health and Human Services Tom Price, where he will talk about the repeal-and-replace efforts regarding Obamacare.
With that, I’ll be glad to take a few questions.  
Q    Follow-up on the executive order?  Have you told --
MR. SPICER:  John Roberts.
Q    Thank you.  (Laughter.)  You told us -- I figured since it’s just a gaggle -- you told us many times that the President was going to continue with the case in Seattle federal court, yet paragraph 13 in the new EO says he’s going to revoke the original one.  What changed?
MR. SPICER:  As you know, he met with his team over the weekend down in Mar-a-Lago -- general counsel, Secretary Sessions, Secretary Kelly, Stephen Miller, other members of the team -- where they discussed -- continued discussing the current executive order, as well as the strategy.  And they made a determination that it was best to pursue this track.
And again, I think, as I mentioned in the opening remarks, we continue to maintain that the order was fully lawful but there were some legal hurdles that we’d have to potentially cross in terms of enjoinment and things like that.  
So it was discussed with the President Saturday, and he made a decision that this was how he wanted to proceed going forward, based on the advice and counsel of his team.
Q    DOJ has informed the 9th circuit of the existence of the new executive order.  Will they move to dismiss the 48 cases that are facing that original order?  
MR. SPICER:  That’s a good question.  I know that there’s the issue of both the 9th circuit and then the other ones.  And I’ll have to get back to you on that.  I don’t know what posture they’re going to take, so we’ll go forward.
Margaret.
Q    I was just going to say, would you be able to let all of us --
MR. SPICER:  Oh, yeah, I’m sorry.  Yeah, I’d be glad to let everybody know.  
Q    I’ve got a question too but I can wait until he’s finished, it’s fine.
MR. SPICER:  John, are you done?
Q    Oh, I’m done.
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  See how much nicer this is?  Margaret.
Q    Oh, thank you.  Well, actually I’d like to move away from this subject to the other subject. 
MR. SPICER:  Sure.
Q    Is the President going to clarify what he meant when he accused President Obama and White House officials of doing wiretaps?  Is that what he meant, or did he mean that he thinks there were wiretaps that the FBI authorized?  And does he want to kind of, like, amend his previous statement?
MR. SPICER:  I think the statement that we issued yesterday where -- President Donald J. Trump is requesting as part of the investigation of Russian activity that congressional intelligence committees exercise their oversight authority to determine whether executive branch investigative powers were abused in 2016.  Neither the White House nor the President will comment further until such oversight is continued.  
He wants Congress to look into this.  I’ve spoken to the President again today.  He would ask that they, additionally, look into this issue of leaks of classified and other information coming from the government.  He believes that it undermines our national security and that Congress -- the intelligence communities in Congress, using their oversight authority, look into these pervasive leaks of national security -- of classified information.  So he would do that.  
I would note, it’s interesting that when you look at what former DNI Clapper said on “Meet the Press,” when he was asked if there was any evidence that the Trump campaign was colluding with the Russian government while the Kremlin was working to influence the election, his quote was, “Not to my knowledge.”  
I think we’ve continued to see people who have been briefed and are aware of these stories that have existed -- Congressman Chairman Nunes of the Intelligence Committee, Tom Cotton of the -- he’s on the Senate Intelligence Committee, Richard Burr, Marco Rubio -- you name it, on and on and on, have said that the information that they’ve been provided -- and this is -- I get it, there’s two separate issues here.  But I think on the first one, you saw over and over again the continued comments by people who are in the know or have been in the know on that situation saying that there was no knowledge.  Conversely, you saw former Attorney General Mukasey come out and talk about -- that it’s pretty clear that there was some sort of surveillance or wiretaps that had to have existed.
All that being said, I think that’s why the President is asking Congress, the intelligence committees to use their oversight authority to further understand what’s in this.
I’m sorry.  
Q    And so --
MR. SPICER:  I’m not sorry but I knew you --
Q    No, no, no -- yeah.  Just before we move on -- okay, so for now, the President is not amending what he tweeted.
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    And Jim Comey, in the meantime, I guess wanted Justice to knock it down.  Has the President talked to Jim Comey?
MR. SPICER:  I’ll be honest with you, I have not seen anything aside from another report based on anonymous sources that that actually happened.  So aside from anonymous sources saying that a conversation happened, I’m not aware that that occurred.  I don’t know that we’re aware that that occurred.  And I, frankly, don’t see anything on the record that show that that actually occurred.
So just to be clear, this is one of the problems that I think occurred in the whole first set of stories.  People start taking things as fact because a series of off-the-record and anonymous sources say they do.  We have started to become a series of believing all of these stories, and yet -- I’ve addressed this in the past -- there’s nothing there to substantiate it.  
In fact, all of the people, from -- I mean, Clapper’s comment, “Not to my knowledge.”  You saw Nunes, Rubio, all these senators and House members that have been briefed by the FBI coming out and saying, we have not seen anything, either.  At some point, I would ask people to take on-the-record sources and quotes as important as the countless numbers of anonymous off-the-records. 
Zeke.  Oh, I’m sorry -- 
Q    Sean --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, I just saw the top of a head.  Hallie, I’m going to get to you, don’t worry.  I’m sorry, that was my bad.  
Q    It’s okay, it’s all right.  So explain this to me, then.  You’re talking about not using anonymous sources.  What is, then, the sourcing for the President’s tweet on Saturday morning?
MR. SPICER:  As I said, I think, look --
Q    And does he believe it’s a FISA warrant.  Is it some other -- of surveillance?
MR. SPICER:  It could be FISA.  It could be surveillance.  There’s no cameras, slow it down.
Q    So he doesn’t know?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I think he has made it clear that there are continued reports that have been out there.  I’m not going to continue to -- I think the President made it clear yesterday that he wants Congress to go in and look at this.  I think there is substantial reporting out there from individuals and from sources.
Q    But what sources --
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  Sara, you’re not on camera.  You don’t need to jump in.  We’ll get to your question in turn.  Hold on.  
The answer is, is that the President has made it clear he wants Congress to look into this.  And we’re encouraging the House and Senate intelligence committees to use their oversight capabilities and look into this.
John Gizzi.
Q    Sean, does he not know whether -- what kind of surveillance it was?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that there’s no question that something happened.  The question is, is it surveillance, is it a wiretap, or whatever.  But there’s been enough reporting that strongly suggests that something occurred.  And I think that that’s why what he has said yesterday is that he wants Congress to look into this.  And I think that there is enough out there now that makes one wonder how some of this happened without the existence of surveillance.
Q    But when he published his tweet --
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    -- did he know what kind of surveillance?
MR. SPICER:  All I’m telling -- like I said, I’m going to put a pin in this and say, the statement yesterday made it very clear that he wants House and Senate Intelligence Committee members to use their oversight authority to look into this situation.
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Has the President ever said there’s hypocrisy and a double standard in the reporting of things?  For example, about alleged Russian involvement in U.S. elections, and then on the other hand, relatively little attention paid to the leaking of conversations with world leaders that are classified?  And does the leaking of his conversations with world leaders bother him and make him want to investigate that as well?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I mean, I think he is very concerned about that.  There is obviously information that affects national security that has been leaked out that concerns him.  I mean, it’s -- and I think when you’ve seen some of the leader calls being leaked out that are sort of congratulatory or not necessarily dealing with state secrets or national security, that’s one thing to seem -- but it gives you pause and concern to realize that, if you’re talking about something of national security, of something that affects two of our different economies or countries, that -- whether it’s China or North Korea, whether you’re actually talking to them or talking about them with another leader, that there is obviously concern that those calls are getting leaked out.  And I think that’s why the President is also now asking Congress to additionally use its oversight authorities to also look at those leaks and wonder why that’s happening.  
So I think he is concerned.  I think we’ve said it several times before, and it’s obviously something that is of major concern.  And, frankly, when you recognize the potential that that could have on the safety of our country, it should give everyone pause.
Hallie.
Q    Sean, two topics for you here.  I want to clarify some questions again from my colleagues.  Has the President spoken with the FBI director about the allegations he made Saturday morning, and does he have confidence in his FBI?
MR. SPICER:  To the best of my knowledge, I’m almost 100 percent certain that he has not, but I’ve not specifically asked him.  I’m not aware that that occurred.  Obviously I’ll give myself -- and I’d be glad to get back, but I have not known that that existed.  So I’m giving myself the ability to get back to you on this, but I’m not --
Q    And all of us.
MR. SPICER:  And all of you.  We’re making a list.  But I am not aware that that actually happened.
Q    And the confidence question.  Does he have confidence in his director?
MR. SPICER:  There’s nothing that I have been told by him that would lead me to believe that anything is different than when it was prior.
Q    And before I get to the second topic, a clarification here.  You’re talking about the President wanting to go to Congress, specifically on the wiretapping question, but this is information that is held by the executive branch.  So why would the President, if it’s information the executive branch has --
MR. SPICER:  Because I think that there’s -- like, again, and I’m not going to -- I want to stay in my wheelhouse here.  But my understanding is, is that the President directing the Department of Justice to do something with respect to an investigation that may or may not occur with evidence may be seen as trying to interfere.  And I think that we’re trying to do this in the proper way, and that’s --
Q    So his tweets about it -- sort of saying that this information exists does not --
MR. SPICER:  That doesn’t interfere with an investigation. 
So, Zeke.
Q    Okay, the second topic was actually on the immigration executive order.  The President back in January tweeted about a one-week delay on the travel ban, would have let “bad dudes” enter the country.  This particular revised order doesn’t go into effect for another 10 days.
MR. SPICER:  The 16th.
Q    So what changed?  How does that under -- does that undercut your argument that the nation was at risk?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I would argue that the court kind of undercut our argument by not reading the U.S. code the way it’s intended to.  But I think we lost the element of surprise way back when we said we were going to issue a second executive order.
Q    So that’s what it was about, the element of surprise?
MR. SPICER:  Oh, absolutely.  I think we said at the beginning.  The whole reason that we did it in the way that we did was because if you -- started to telegraph it.  But I think that when we started talking about a second executive order a couple of weeks back, I think that that generally took away -- whether it was done on Friday or Sunday or Monday, it wouldn’t have mattered.  And people have been able to -- we have telegraphed what we’re doing for the last couple weeks.  We took that away, and the President, as you’ve seen, has been very methodical about making sure we’ve talked about this for the last week --
Q    Since the --  
MR. SPICER:  Right, but talking about implementing it correctly.  And I think Saturday night, if you saw the group of individuals who were down in Florida sitting with him, this is part of that implementation process that we’ve been talking about, that we were continuing to tweak it, to get it ready to speed, overcome a lot of issues and concerns that had to get added in or out, and make sure that the government was properly -- but make no mistake, we lost the element of surprise back when we said -- when the court enjoined this in the 9th circuit, and then we had to go back to the drawing board and we talked about doing a second order.  That was the intent of it the entire time.  You lose that back then.
Zeke.
Q    Going back to the previous topic, the President calling for Congress to investigate these specific issues.  Does that mean that the President is willing -- or is committing now to accepting the conclusions of these congressional investigations no matter what they say on anything?  So because he’s now calling for this investigation, he is now committing to accept the outcome?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I don’t think you would ever just blanketly say “I’m going to accept any outcome.”  That doesn’t matter what it is.  You can go to court and -- it doesn’t mean that you get found guilty or innocent that you’re accepting the outcome, it means that you’re agreeing that that’s a legitimate -- but I think we’re going to let Congress work its will.  I think if we have a problem with one of the conclusions, we’ll let it be known.
But I think that, for right now, the issue is, is that we think that that’s the appropriate place for this to be looked into.  And they have the resources, and they, themselves, have admitted that.
Alexis.
Q    Sean, can I ask two topics?
MR. SPICER:  Sure.
Q    On this topic, let me just follow up.  If members of Congress pursue an investigation that looks into surveillance in the way the President would like them to, and he believes that that surveillance is potentially against the law, they would make recommendations to the executive branch to pursue and prosecute anyone responsible for that.  So their recommendations would come back to the Justice Department.  So to ask the question again, would the President accept the recommendations of the legislative branch that potentially laws were broken and that those accusations should come back to the Justice Department to investigate?
MR. SPICER:  I think it’s hard to prejudge what they’re doing.  Obviously, the reason that he’s asking the House and Senate Intelligence Committee to go through this is because he thinks that they are the appropriate venues.  They have the appropriate staff to look at them, and I think it’s an appropriate way of having that separation of powers, if you will, where it’s not asking -- directing the Department of Justice to do something that they may or may not be the ones conducting.
But again, the reason I don’t want to give a blanket statement, Alexis, isn’t because I’m trying to prejudge it.  But I think that depending on a lot of things, you don’t want to say, we’re going to accept every single thing they do.  I think we definitely will have a lot of respect for what they do and what they look into, but I think to blanketly accept -- just say, we’re going to accept anything they say or do, might be a bit premature and not exactly the way to go.
Q    And I had a healthcare question but before I do that, it was reported that the President was interested in having the White House Counsel pursue information that would help support the President’s argument that he may have been under surveillance.  Is it the case that the President has indeed asked Don McGhan to continue doing that?  Or is he dropping that and --
MR. SPICER:  No, Don McGhan was never asked -- all Don Mcghan was ever asked to do was to review what options, if any, were available.  That’s it.  Just review internally and tell the President, this is what’s -- but we made very clear to anyone who asked -- and if you know Don and the team here -- these are unbelievably talented lawyers.  They’re very skilled in understanding their -- where the bounds are, and would understand that any type of interference would be -- it was an internal review of what options, if any, were available.  So it’s full stop.
Q    And that was completed?
MR. SPICER:  That guidance was made available to the President.  
Q    Okay.  Here’s my healthcare question.
MR. SPICER:  It was also reported that the President’s desire for speed with the administration’s own Affordable Care Act replacement plan has kicked the ball to the OMB Director rather the HHS Secretary to complete that work and get it out this week.  Who is in charge of actually completing that?  Is it more now in the ball court of OMB rather than HHS?  Or are they working together?  How would you describe it, and is it still coming out this week?
MR. SPICER:  I believe it is coming out -- I have every intention that it comes out this week.  But I think it’s a joint effort.  I think Secretary Price is obviously the lead; it’s HHS.  But Director Mulvaney, his time -- I mean, they’ve both served in the House and were champions of budget issues.  Obviously, there’s a huge budgetary impact on that, and his understanding of the budget, his role here, and, obviously, his understanding of Congress makes Director Mulvaney a great partner.
So it’s not a question of -- and this is the same issue that came up during the transition on trade.  I think we have an unbelievably talented team -- everybody from Robert Lighthizer, when he gets confirmed as the U.S. Trade Rep, you’ve got Wilbur Ross at Commerce, Peter Navarro here -- it’s not an either/or thing.  It’s I think bringing the best and the brightest together to get something through.
Obamacare and repealing and replacing it with something that’s more accessible, affordable, more innovative is not something that just has to land in one person’s hand.  It can be covered -- and I think there are great partners and great teammates.
Yes.
Q    Yes, please, thank you, Sean.  I’m just wondering when you said that it’s pretty clear that there was some sort of intelligence or wiretaps and that that’s why we need to move forward with an investigation, is that based on people speaking on the record, or anonymous sources?
MR. SPICER:  On the record.  I think General Mukasey was very much on the record when he came to that conclusion.  I think that when you -- anyway.  I will leave it to Congress to further follow up on that.
Q    And one more, if I may.  The President has yet to announce the vast majority of his sub-Cabinet-level nominations, such as Ambassador to Japan.  Does the White House have a long-term timeline for all the rest of these nominations?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think that you should -- there’s a bunch of sub-Cabinet individuals and ambassadorships that should be coming out very soon.  One of the things that I think -- I’m glad you kind of gave me an opportunity to touch on personnel.  There was a report the other day that of, like, the 1,927 positions that -- someone went through, I think one of the things that people have to recognize is -- we talked about this a lot during the transition.  We had about 600 members of these beachhead teams that went in under a special hiring process -- that they’re able to be there for 120 days.  For the most part, most of those people transition into Schedule C positions.  It’s not a given.  It is not a default, meaning -- and I think we made it clear during the transition -- it’s not just if you showed up for the first 120 days you get to stay.  But sort of -- they were chosen specifically because of their understanding of the issue, their expertise or their desire to serve in that particular capacity.
And so we actually -- when you actually look at the numbers, we are well ahead, if not on par with -- we’re well ahead of almost every modern administration.  I think we’re right on par with Obama ’08.  But you think about it, of the 1,927 or so positions, we’ve got over 600 of those individuals, and -- most of whom so far are looking like they’re fully going to convert to Schedule C.  But they are performing the duties that would be done by a Schedule C. 
So when you look at the totality of what we’re doing, we were well ahead on the Cabinet.  And again, one of the other things is, you’ve got Congress still holding up the Cabinet getting appointed.  And so I think there’s a degree to which Senate Democrats, before we get a lot of stones thrown at us about where we are on the rest, they haven’t even finished the job at hand of getting the full Cabinet.
Jon Decker.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  Two questions on the executive order.  With the first executive order, there was a lot of fanfare when the President signed that executive order; in the Oval Office today, not so much.  We didn’t see the President, no cameras, no pool.  Why didn’t he want to show us him signing this new executive order?
MR. SPICER:  I tweeted a picture out.  
Q    That’s your picture, that’s not independent --
Q    Well, I know -- from today.  Yeah, that’s your --
MR. SPICER:  I know, I’m -- I think -- (laughter) -- there are three agencies that are dealing with -- to your point, we went through this.  We talked about the courts issue, we talked about this ad nauseam; the President got asked about it over and over again.  I think today was about the implementation of it, was about having the three Departments that are expressly named to implement this to talk about what they’re doing to implement it.  And I think they did a phenomenal job about it.
And that’s what we wanted to highlight today, is the government getting it done.  And the way that the Department of Justice, the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of State were implementing the measures that the President laid forth -- again, if you think about it, the principles of the executive order remain the same.  We looked at what the court said, we put together a thing -- we consulted with the relevant agencies and Departments.  We talked to Congress.  We had an extensive morning of briefings.  The call to the press lasted about an hour, I guess.
And so we made sure that everybody knew what we were doing.  We sent them out to make sure that the American people could see what they were doing.  
And so I just want to be clear that I think we did a phenomenal job of rolling it out and making sure the American people saw the faces of the Departments that were instrumental in implementing it.  
I’m sorry, Jon, go ahead.
Q    That’s all right.  The second one has to do with this idea of “element of surprise.”  With the first executive order and also with this one, there’s a 90-day temporary ban on residents entering this country from six predominantly Muslim countries.  What’s to stop a so-called “bad dude” from one of these countries from coming into the country on the 91st day, or the 92nd day?  Why 90 days?  Doesn’t that get rid of that element of surprise when you say --
MR. SPICER:  No, I think that -- no, but -- thank you, that’s actually an interesting question.  I think part of it is, is that we feel confident that during that 90-day period, the processes could be put in place.
Now, remember, there’s two key things that are important.  Number one is these six countries are the ones that we don’t have the information currently that we feel comfortable -- and as I lifted off why -- I mean, there are some that literally are state-sponsors of terror.  And I think when you recognize -- I don’t think there’s any American that wants a country that is a state-sponsor of terror to be sending their individuals here without us properly vetting them.
You talk about Yemen, the documents that people use in Yemen are not accepted by a whole host of countries because they lack the integrity to ensure that they are not compromised.  And I think that there is a big difference in that, but we can -- at the end of that 90-day period, we can let a country off, we can expand the list of countries, we could indefinitely address the countries that are on the list, we could expand that list to other countries that aren’t on it.
But there’s two things that are happening.  One is, we’re putting a ban on those countries, the six that are named.  But two is, we’re looking at an entire -- at the rest of the entire world, and all of the procedures that we use to address all countries. 
And so at the end of that period, we could add countries.  We could subtract countries.  We could decide to indefinitely continue with one of the two -- one of the six, rather.  But if you look at the case of Iraq, after the first order, they stepped up with four very specific things that they did to ensure that people traveling from Iraq, we had certain things -- whether it be biometrics and others -- that let us ensure that people coming into the country, we felt confident in knowing that they were coming in.
But that’s an important thing.  It’s not just those six.  We’re looking at that time -- we’re dealing with those during that 90-day -- but we’re also looking at everybody else at the same period.
Kaitlan.
Q    So why doesn’t the order prevent people who didn’t have visas by the day of the first order from coming in the country?  Because wouldn’t that safeguard from the people who went and got visas during this revision period?  
MR. SPICER:  I would just say I think that there’s appropriate steps that have been taken during that period to ensure that the homeland has been protected.
Go ahead, I know you have another one.
Q    Just one more question.
MR. SPICER:  Of course.
Q    Does the President think that Barack Obama himself wiretapped him, or someone in the administration?
MR. SPICER:  I’m just going to say that as the President noted in his statement, we’re going to let Congress look into that and then we’ll get back to you -- we’ll discuss it after Congress comes with -- Erin.
Q    Since the President contends that he and President Obama like each other, has he picked up the phone and called President Obama since the inauguration, or did he think about asking him directly before accusing him publicly?
MR. SPICER:  I have not -- I’m not aware of whether or not they’ve talked.  I can ask and find out and get back to you.
Cecilia.
Q    Does the fact that you’re rescinding this first executive order -- is it at all an admission that things just didn’t go right the first time around?
MR. SPICER:  No.  I think the first executive order, we’ve made clear time and time again -- when you look at how the court adjudicated that, their facts were wrong.  Just in terms of how many people had come into the country, they based it off of several things that I think were not factually accurate.  I think we recognized that we could have been in litigation for up to a year on this, and that would have left the country exposed.  
And I think that that’s -- there is a goal here that we sought to achieve the first time that we have to maintain.  But by no means -- we 100 percent maintain that the executive order as initially drafted is completely constitutional and legal, and that what we’ve done is to do the best of our ability based on what the court --
Q    Sean --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, it’s still Cecilia’s turn.
Q    Thank you.  What about this issue of radicalization after people are here, which is what DHS raised in that report?  One of the examples that’s cited in the EO today is the Somali man, now, who came as a child and was radicalized here.  So what does this order do about that population of people?
MR. SPICER:  The people that are here --
Q    That are here, which is what -- the concern that DHS raised in this report, that said people -- the bigger concern is people who are here and are radicalized after the fact, not those that are here just stopping to --
MR. SPICER:  I think that what we need to do -- this isn’t a one-stop shop.  I think that we have to look at this -- the entire problem.  This is one piece of the problem that we’re looking at to make sure that we keep the country safe.  It’s not a either/or, or only-this-then.  But I think you’re going to see a continuation of steps that the President takes to make sure that the country is protected.
One small correction that I’ve been made aware of, it’s Somalia, not Yemen, that the travel docs are not accepted.  So my apologies to Yemen.  
Jeff, did you -- hold on.  Thanks.  Jeff.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  You’ve mentioned a couple times and referred a couple times today to DNI Clapper -- former DNI Clapper’s comments on -- over the weekend about Russia and the Trump campaign.  Are you encouraging people to take those comments seriously but not the comments where he said there was no wiretapping?
MR. SPICER:  No, I’m just -- well, first of all, he also said that he wasn’t aware -- he couldn’t speak entirely when it came to wiretapping.  He said that he wasn’t aware of anything.  I take him at his word that he wasn’t aware, but that doesn’t mean that it didn’t exist.
But I also think that it’s interesting that the double standard that has existed for so long when it comes to -- you have these sources over and over again who have been briefed by the FBI that say, I was briefed, there’s nothing there.  You have Clapper saying, “Not that I’m aware of.”  And yet, we still have these stories over and over again citing anonymous sources.
At some point, you have to question how many times are you going to take “didn’t see anything there” before we start seeing these stories getting rewritten over and over and over again?  I think that is a valid question.  It’s interesting how everyone today is asking what sources we have, and yet we’ve been asking the same question about the sources for these anonymous sources and story after story for the last six months.  And it’s just, don’t worry, we have these trusted anonymous sources that may or may not be true.  And at the bottom of every story it has some kind of caveat that -- however there has been no formal evidence presented.
I think there’s been a malignment for so many months about what may or may not have happened, and yet not a shred of single truth has actually come that shows any evidence that existed except for anonymous source after anonymous source after anonymous source.
Q    On a different issue?  
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.
Q    What is the White House’s reaction to North Korea firing four ballistic missiles into the sea off of Japan’s northwest?
MR. SPICER:  The launches are consistent with North Korea’s long history of provocative behavior.  The United States stands with our allies in the face of this very serious threat.  The Trump administration is taking steps to enhance our ability to defend against North Korea’s ballistic missiles, such as through the deployment of a THAAD battery to South Africa -- South Korea.
Q    I just want to circle back around to a couple things that you said.  You said it could be FISA, it could be surveillance.  So are you saying that the administration is conceding that somewhere there was evidence presented before a judge that shows there could be collusion with the campaign and that it was okay to surveil them?
MR. SPICER:  No, what I'm suggesting is that, as I said, that our goal is to allow Congress to do its job, as the statement said yesterday.
Olivier.
Q    And then the follow-up on the new order.  You had said that there are a hundred or so that had been inspected, but how many total that came in that you all have detained. 
MR. SPICER:  It’s 300.
Q    Of 300 -- 100 refugees?  You said hundreds of -- or 300 refugees.  How many total came in, and how many did you detain?
MR. SPICER:  I'd ask you to talk to the Department of Justice -- actually, Homeland Security on that one.  I know the top-line stat on that one.
Olivier.
Q    A couple for you.  One, just scheduling.  The Israeli defense minister is in town tomorrow.  Will he meet with the President?
MR. SPICER:  I'll have to get back to you on that.  I'm not aware that that's on the schedule at this time, but -- I don't know.  I know that he and Prime Minister Netanyahu spoke earlier.  I'm not aware that that came up.
Q    And can you flesh out this notion of 300 refugees being investigated?  What are they being investigated for, specifically?  What’s the source for this information --
MR. SPICER:  The FBI.
Q    So the FBI is investigating 300 refugees currently on U.S. soil on terrorism-related charges?
MR. SPICER:  That's what I have been -- yes.  I'll get you the stat for that, but that's --
Q    That would be great.  Thank you.
MR. SPICER:  Anita.
Q    Can you talk a little bit about Iraq and how they’re not -- why they’re not in the executive order anymore?  So is this a signal to the other six and to other countries that they can also get removed if they -- I think you called it “proactive,” if they were proactively having their own actions?  
MR. SPICER:  I think what I would say, and I think the way you phrased it is right.  It’s not just the six countries, it's countries throughout the globe.  I think that we are -- it is in every country’s best interest to know who’s coming in and out of its country and to do things.  And I think there are things that we've asked countries to do.  And it's not inclusive, it's not “have you hit these four.”  I think each country is a separate case.  So I don't want to say, “if you do these four you're in.”  
Q    But is it possible, then, to --
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.  I think there is -- now, in some cases, like anything else, Anita, it may be easier for one country to achieve something than for another.  But at the end of the day, I think there are certain things that -- there are certain steps that Iraq went through, including things like biometrics and turning over lists of -- updating lists, rather, of people within their country that have -- that pose a threat.  
And so that -- they’ve agreed to do certain things after the first one was ordered that give us a much greater degree of confidence in knowing who is coming in and out of the country.
Q    And then on another topic.  What was the President’s reaction to hearing about Vice President Pence’s email use, personal email for government business?  I ask, obviously, because he had so many things to say about Hillary Clinton using personal email for government business last year?
MR. SPICER:  I was going to insert, like, an AOL joke here.  (Laughter.)  
But I think, look, I don’t -- I think there’s a big difference.  The Vice President complied with Indiana law, turned over all of his emails and made sure that everything was done.  I mean, that’s a very big step.  There’s no question that I’ve been made aware of that he didn’t do everything in compliance with Indiana law.  There’s a big difference between doing what is common practice within a state government and what is in compliance with that state’s laws, then setting up a private server that seeks specifically to go around the government protocols and the Federal Records Act.
There’s a big difference between that.  But I mean, the governor at the time, and now the Vice President, did everything in compliance with Indiana law.  And I think that’s a big difference, is that it’s not a question of -- it’s a question of was there a law and was there a rule and did you follow it.  In the case of Governor Pence, he did.  In the case of Secretary Clinton, I would let the record speak for itself on that.
Sara.  Gabby, I’m sorry.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Part of the justification for the hurried rollout of the initial executive order on immigration was that if it wasn’t rolled out immediately, that people would take advantage of that and come into the country.  So why has the administration decided to delay the implementation of this new executive order until March 16th?
MR. SPICER:  I’m going to refer you Hallie Jackson.  (Laughter.)  That was what Hallie asked earlier.
Q    Sorry.
MR. SPICER:  No problem, it’s in the -- but basically the answer that I gave Hallie that I’ll give to you is, I think the first order -- one of the goals of the first order was an element of surprise, to implement it in a way that didn’t allow people to get in, right?
Since the 9th Circuit acted, we’ve been talking about a second executive order.  I think we lost the element of surprise back in mid- to early February when the 9th Circuit acted the way they did.  So that element -- what we’ve tried to do now is to make sure, with that element gone, that we’ve implemented this in a way that ensures the greatest degree of confidence that we know what we’re doing.
One quick item -- I’m not done, so don’t -- you can keep your hands -- someone asked earlier, and I’m trying to remember who, about the source for DOJ.  Was that you, Olivier?  The Department of Justice, FBI investigation, section one, subsection H, the text of the EO notes -- you can check on that for the source.
I’m sorry.  Matt.
Q    Thanks.  Sean, doubling back to something we talked about earlier.  President Trump accused President Obama of criminal conduct.  One, can you tell us what his source was for that accusation?  Two, can you tell us, unequivocally, that he was basing that on more than a talk radio report and a Breitbart article about that talk radio report? 
MR. SPICER:  I’m going to tell that -- I’ve said it over and over again, I think the President made it very clear in the statement yesterday that he is not going to comment any further on this until Congress does --
Q    So maybe it was just based on the talk radio report?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to -- I’m just going to say that the President made it very clear that, based on numerous things, including -- and I think there’s a New York Times story on it, there’s several sources that made this clear or brought this to light -- but I’m not going to go into anything further, as the President noted, until this is resolved.
Mara.
Q    I have two topics.  One, on the EO that maybe is coming later this week -- an EO on the Obama administration’s fuel-economy standards.  Are you going to have an EO reversing those, and will that also negate California’s waiver?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t see anything on -- I’ll have to get back to you, as my standard.  I’m not so sure on the timing -- I was just looking at my date.  
Q    Oh, okay.  Thank you.  
MR. SPICER:  But I’d just -- I wouldn’t get -- I don’t have anything to announce at the time, is generally how I answer that, and I’m going to stick to it.
Q    Okay, but I have just one more question on the other topic.  You said that you pointed rightly to Clapper’s comments -- nothing that he knows of suggests there was any collusion between the campaign and Russia.  But he also said that he didn’t know of any wiretap FISA order.  Why are you willing to accept his --
MR. SPICER:  That’s what Jeff asked.
Q    Well, I guess the thing I’m asking is that the President of the United States has unilateral authority to declassify anything that he wants.  He said in his tweet, I just learned of this.  So he obviously had some kind of evidence.  Why not declassify it?
MR. SPICER:  I think that’s -- as I have made clear, there’s a reason that we want Congress, the intelligence committees to do their job in terms of making sure that there’s a separation of powers.  
Q    He’s afraid it would look like interference?
MR. SPICER:  I think that, again, I’m just going to leave it at that he thinks it’s appropriate for Congress to do this instead of trying to point to his own Department of Justice.
Ashley.
Q    Sean --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, you’re going to wait your turn.  It’s Ashley’s turn.
Q    Thank you.  This morning, Kellyanne Conway went on Fox News and she said, “He’s the President of the United States.  He has information and intelligence that the rest of us do not.”  So that seemed to be referring not to these news reports you’re talking about, but to specific, tangible evidence.  So what can you tell us about what that evidence is, where it came from?  And then secondly, if he has this evidence, why is he asking Congress to investigate?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I just -- I think the point that Kellyanne was making at the time is that the President, because he’s President, gets access to NSC and other intelligence documents.  I don’t know -- I haven’t seen the exact transcript, so I can’t --
Q    I can read it to you.
MR. SPICER:  I appreciate that, thank you.  But I also haven’t talked to Kellyanne about it, so I don’t think you can do that part.  But I don’t -- so I can’t specifically respond to you in terms of what she was referring to, whether she was referring to the exact nature of his charge or whether, generally speaking, he is given information.
But again, on all of this, I’m going to go back to the statement earlier that the President’s goal right now is to make sure that House and Senate can do this -- yes.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  China is retaliating against the THAAD deployment in South Korea.  What is the U.S. position?
MR. SPICER:  It’s retaliating against what?
Q    Against the THAAD deployment in South Korea, THAAD battery deployment.
MR. SPICER:  The THAAD battery?
Q    Yes.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think we’re going to work with South Korea.  I mean, obviously, North Korea’s missile launches present a danger to our friends down south.  And I think, as I mentioned in our response, we’re going to continue to work with the government of South Korea to address this thing.
Q    Would the U.S. -- the Chinese government?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not at this point -- huh?
Q    -- the Chinese government?
MR. SPICER:  We have not had any further conversations on this.  I think this is consistent with U.S. policy.  
Margaret.
Q    Sean, two points of clarification.  Did the President mean in any way to suggest that the FBI broke the law, or any other intelligence agencies, with this allegation of wiretapping?
MR. SPICER:  In the tweet?  
Q    Yes.  
MR. SPICER:  I’m just going to let the tweet speak for itself.  I’m not going to get into --
Q    Well, that’s why I’m asking this question?
MR. SPICER:  I get it, but I think that I’m not going to try to --
Q    Because it opens that up.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, and I think I will seek further clarification on that.  For right now, I would just suggest to you that I’m going to let it speak until I can get further clarification.
Q    My second point of clarification here.  You said, you know, you didn’t want to really get into what the triggering event was for the tweet in the first place, but I want you to address this part if you would.  The question has been raised -- or the allegation has been raised that the President was simply trying to change the topic off of an unfortunate news cycle that week.  Can you address that portion of the question, that this was deliberately about changing the media narrative and not anything having to do with the story itself?
MR. SPICER:  No, I don’t -- I mean, that’s -- I have nothing to lead me to believe that that was the case.  I’m not sure -- and I think he had a great week last week.  He had a phenomenal joint address.  We had a great visit down in Norfolk, talked about rebuilding the military.  He was in Orlando, in Florida, talking about how school choice can help children and parents and create better schools.  
So I just -- I can’t say that I’ve talked to him specifically about this, but I think the President had a good week.  And so I don’t see any reason that he would be using -- I mean, that just -- I think it was an issue of concern to him.
Q    Sean, let’s remind everybody what the President did tweet Saturday morning:  “Terrible!  Just found out that Obama had my ‘wires tapped’ in Trump Tower just before the victory.”  He later called Obama a stupid guy -- or whatever it was exactly -- a sick guy.  Yeah, sorry.  Are the American people supposed to pull back and suddenly think that this is not the President of the United States accusing his predecessor of committing a crime when he writes it that way?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I think the President speaks very candidly.  His tweets speak for themselves, as we’ve said before, and he’s asked the House and Senate committees to look into this.
Sara.
Q    Considering the scrutiny surrounding President Trump’s then-campaign advisors and Russia, which has carried over at the White House, is he reconsidering at all his hope or his timeline for pairing with Russia to fight ISIS?
MR. SPICER:  Is he -- based on --
Q    Just based on the amount of scrutiny surrounding his --
MR. SPICER:  No, I mean, I think if Russia wants to join with us to fight ISIS, that’s a great --
Q    So nothing has changed on that front?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    And secondly, in light of the fact that there were previously undisclosed communications between the Russian ambassador and Michael Flynn and Jeff Sessions and Jared Kushner, has White House counsel done anything proactively to try to go to senior staffers or other Cabinet-level officials and say, hey, if you have had contact with a Russian official that you have not previously disclosed, then now is the time to do it?
MR. SPICER:  Not that I’m aware of.  I’m not aware of any of that.  I would say that there’s -- one of the things that is interesting that, you know -- in the course of people conducting their business here at the White House or during a transition or in the House or the Senate, you contact a whole host of people -- diplomats, government officials, you know, association representatives, corporate representatives.  I mean, that’s -- those are the kind of folks that talk to people in government.  
And I think that there’s one thing between talking with somebody -- I mean, I think -- and again, I’ll get back to you so don’t be prescriptive on this.  I think someone had told me earlier today that there were something like 20 visits to the Russian ambassador in the last, you know, 10, maybe, years.  I don’t -- huh?  
Q    Twenty-two.
MR. SPICER:  Twenty-two.  Thank you for helping fact check me.  (Laughter.) 
Q    -- is not here, so somebody’s got to do it.  (Laughter.) 
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  Where’s Knoller?  But I think at some point, there’s nothing wrong with people doing their job, right?  I mean, that’s what I think that there is a big difference between so-and-so met with someone.  There’s nothing to disclose with a meeting.  If I have a meeting with a member of the media, no one says, hey, did you know that you need to report every time you meet with this individual or this outlet or whatever.  There’s nowhere to report that kind of stuff.  There’s a big difference between doing something nefarious or illegal and conducting yourself in a routine course of business.
Q    But there were clearly a number of instances where people in this administration suggested they did not have any contact or misled you guys about the amount of contact they had, which has then caused some unflattering news cycles.
MR. SPICER:  Well, and I think -- so in one case, Michael Flynn was, you know -- the President said the inconsistencies and him not being straight with the Vice President -- he asked him to resign.  I think the President dealt with it.
But that was -- again, if you note the President’s comments at the time, he was very clear that the issue wasn’t that he’s doing his job.  The issue was him misleading the Vice President.  And that's a very different thing.
So he had no problem with him doing his job and contacting individuals that we were going to need to be in contact with during the administration.  And that's where I think there is a big difference between a lot of these stories saying, did you know that so and so did this?  There’s nothing wrong with people meeting with ambassadors, or government officials, or corporate representatives, or members of the media.  That's part of what we do in government.  
And so I think there’s a big difference in the question that you're asking about whether or not someone is doing something that's wrong and inappropriate or illegal, and someone doing what they would do in a normal course of business.
Q    Well, I think the other question is just whether there have been more instances in this that are going to catch you guys by surprise since he --
MR. SPICER:  And I guess --
Q    -- the President himself has denied that there was any kind of this contact throughout the campaign, and then we found out there were national security --
MR. SPICER:  But hold on.  Actually -- 
Q    -- advisors you didn't mention meeting with the Russian ambassador as well as Jeff Sessions, and then there was this meeting with Michael Flynn, as well as Jared Kushner, which was not previously disclosed.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, so there’s two things.  You said the President found out about this.  What’s “this?”  Having a meeting?  Again, I don't think that -- there’s countless meetings that members of his senior staff and the rest of people throughout government have on it every day.  That's why he’s asked us to come here and work, is to facilitate some of these meetings and get some of this stuff done.
There is no one to disclose stuff to.  I don't disclose the -- 
Q    That sounds like you're saying you're not concerned that they're -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, it’s not that I’m not concerned.  I guess there’s -- but what I’m getting at, Sara, is that there’s a difference between being concerned about somebody -- I could equally be concerned that if a member of the media said, hey, I want to take a member of your staff out, and we're going to break some kind of ethics rule.  I would be concerned about that.  But I wouldn’t be concerned if they said, hey, we want to go have coffee with a member of the media.  
They don't disclose all that on our staff.  And I think -- but that's essential to your question is, is a meeting -- there’s nothing wrong with a meeting.  There’s nothing wrong with meeting with a government official, or a diplomat, or a member of the media, or a corporate individual, or association, or a constituent, or a citizen that has an issue.  But on any of those categories, once they cross the line and do something wrong, and I think to the answer of your question, the issue was specifically -- or the question surrounded attempts to influence the election.  Those are very different than people meeting also during a transition period, or people meeting in their White House capacity.  But those are three separate instances.
All of the stories that I’ve heard so far, previously all detailed just action with respect to the campaign and Russia’s attempt to influence the campaign, right?  
Q    Yes, I mean, I think --
MR. SPICER:  Yes, I mean that's -- 
Q    That was the backdrop. 
MR. SPICER:  Right.  That's the backdrop.  And then -- and so I think in the one instance where it happened where there was someone that misled someone, they were let go.  
So for you to start asking questions about, well, what if these other individuals had a meeting?  Well, were they ever asked about it?  I mean there’s a big difference between did someone meet with someone; and did someone mislead somebody about meeting someone.  And that is a very, very big difference in those questions.
And that's one of the things that I think is important to distinguish.  People can meet with people.  The question is did they do something wrong.  Did they mislead somebody?  And those are all very, very different categories.
April.
Q    Okay, Sean, I have a couple of topics.  And back on this following up, so the question is:  Under what capacity was he in when he met with the ambassador?  And what did they talk about?
MR. SPICER:  Who is he?
Q    Sessions.
MR. SPICER:  I don't know.  
Q    And then under -- then when he was under oath, he said he didn't do it.  But then we find out later, so what do you say -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no.  Well, first of all, I’m not going to -- I’ll refer you back to the Department of Justice.  I know -- my understanding is he’s amending his testimony to the Senate Judiciary Committee from what I’ve heard.  So I’ll let his people -- but I do think that his explanation that he gave was very -- was that he was answering a question did you have any meetings with anyone with respect to the campaign. 
And I think in his mind, it was very clear that, I never met with anybody with respect to the campaign.  I met with someone in my Senate office, in my capacity as a United States senator, with Senate staff to discuss foreign policy or whatever it was that he was discussing.  
I think the Senator discussed this in his media conference last week Thursday.  So I don't -- I guess the issue is with respect to what was talked about, I don't know.  That's up to him.
But I do think the way he described it was very clear that he believed he was answering Senator Franken’s question with respect to activity involving the campaign and attempts to -- as I said to Sara, like this whole idea of influencing the election.  Meeting with an ambassador about an area of foreign policy in his Senate office with his Senate staff was clearly not a campaign event.
Q    Okay, so now on the leak issue.  You're talking about Congress doing an investigation.  But some of these leaks are coming from top officials, people who know insider information.  What has the President said to his staff as it relates to the leaks in reference to trying to find out himself, not just from top-level people, what has he said to people about the leaks, about trying to stop it, or trying to find out what’s happening? 
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the President made clear in his comments when he stood before you all a couple weeks ago that his main concern is national security.  That's -- when he keeps talking about the leaks, his concern is the leaks that damage and undermine national security, the leaks that deal with classified and other information.  That's what his main concern is.  And I don't think -- that's not a White House issue.  That's sort of -- that is an issue that is beyond the White House.  We're not -- 
Q    Other leaks don't matter, but the national --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, I think -- it’s not that other leaks don't matter.  I think his issue that he has talked about and his concern is the leaks of national security.  It’s not that he’s saying, other leaks are okay.  
But I think the ones that threaten our public safety or potentially put our country in harm are the ones that he really cares about.  
Peter.
Q    I have a question.  I’m sorry.  This President reached out to former President Obama several times when he was President. 
MR. SPICER:  That's right. 
Q    They started building something.  There was a bridge.  Now some people in the Obama camp are considering these conversations about, or these tweets crazy.  And the question is now:  With this divide between these two, and President Trump may need to one day reach back to former President Obama, how do you think that will play out?  Do you think that these two will never come back together again?  Is this something he could have talked to him about before he went on Twitter?  There is now a chasm.  There’s a divide that wasn’t there a couple of weeks ago.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, well, there was a divide during the campaign, too.  I don't think that -- I think that, as you saw, and the President has made it very clear, he said some things about the President.  And the President said stuff -- about the campaign.  I think they came together for the good of the country.  And in cases where they can come together for a common good and to talk about what’s in the country’s best interests, they will.
But I understand your point.  I just think the President -- 
Q    Did he burn a bridge?
Q    Hold up, hold on.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  But I think that they’ll be just fine.  So go ahead.  That's you. 
Q    Oh, good.
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    Hi, Sean.
MR. SPICER:  Hi, Julie.  You've been very patient.
Q    Yes, I have.  Thanks.
MR. SPICER:  I think it’s your first time.
Q    It is, yes.
MR. SPICER:  Well, welcome.  See how pleasant this is?
Q    I was feeling like how can I not get called on my first time?  Ten years ago, Bob Levinson disappeared in Iran.  And I know the President talked about this a little bit on the campaign trail.  Is there anything you can tell us about how the administration is approaching this case?  Have they been in communication with his family or any updates on that?
MR. SPICER:  I think we put out a statement from the NSC on Friday on this -- Victoria.  I think we -- so we have been in communication with his family.  I believe they were here -- or we were in touch with them last week.  And obviously, we continue to hold out hope.  But the administration has been in touch with his family. 
Q    Sean, the call to Netanyahu, what prompted that?  
MR. SPICER:  I don't know, Dave.  I’ll find out.  I just know it happened.  And I got a little bit of a -- 
Q    As you might know, the Prime Minister is meeting later this week with Vladimir Putin.  Did the President and the Prime Minister talk about Syria at all?
MR. SPICER:  I don't know.  I know that they had a discussion about regional threats, so I don't want to get ahead of this.
David Jackson.
Q    Comey did tell people this weekend that President Obama did not order these wiretaps, and he did want the Justice Department to put out that statement.  Does President Obama believe -- 
MR. SPICER:  Are you -- like I said, I am not -- wait, so -- 
Q    Does President Trump believe Comey when he says that President Obama did not authorize these wiretaps?
MR. SPICER:  My question is, is that I don't think that we've confirmed that Director Comey did say that.  I don't -- I’m not aware.  Aside from reading stories that cite anonymous sources saying that he did, I’m not aware that that actually happened.  So that's the first issue that I think we need to resolve.
Q    Well, people we trust did tell us that he did.
MR. SPICER:  Well, with all due respect, not you, but I think that we've had a number of reports that I’ve seen that -- about things that have occurred in the last 40-some-odd days that actually didn't occur, but anonymous sources said they did.
Peter Alexander.
Q    Sean, to be clear, you said earlier as an on-the-record source for the President’s wiretapping claims, he referred to the former Attorney General Michael Mukasey.  I just want to ask you to clarify if you could because his public comments were on Sunday, a day after the President tweeted about this.   And even in his public comments, he said that he based his information “on news reports.”
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  But I’m just saying that he is -- someone asked whether it was an on-the-record comment.  And that is on the record.
Q    But I was saying, was there an on -- you were being asked was there an on-the-record comment in advance of the President’s tweets to which he was basing his information?  Did he have anything better than anonymous sources?
MR. SPICER:  I don't -- I’m not -- as I said before, I’m not going to get into the elements of that.  I’ll just -- I’m going to wait until the House and Senate.
Q    Really, just on a past comment that the President had made about the suggestion that there were -- or the claim, in fact, that there were 3 million to 5 million people who voted illegally in this country -- he made this claim more than a month ago.  I just want to get a sense now on the update on any investigation into that and where it stands, given the explosive nature of such a claim.
MR. SPICER:  I think we’ve touched on this, but he has asked Vice President Pence to lead a task force on this.  We have -- I'll get more for you.  I know that there’s been some discussion with some Secretaries of State and others on some of this.  I know you had that issue in Texas come -- last week, and I'm trying to remember the exact nature of it, but there has been now further evidence that people have voted illegally.  And I think that one of the things the task force is looking to do is to gather additional information of what -- it's still in the process of getting the task members named.
Q    Does the task force, I guess, exist yet?  Or is --
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, the Vice President has been talking to folks potentially to serve on it, and I know that several Secretaries of State have expressed --
Q    It hasn't convened yet, but he’s been talking to folks about it.
MR. SPICER:  That's correct.  That's correct.
Q    Sean, two subjects here, following up on the wiretap question.  Stepping away from what the President knew or the basis of his tweets, how appropriate is it for a President to make an explosive charge as fact and then send you folks out to step away and say this maybe happened and we should investigate it?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, I think there’s two things.  One is the President’s tweets speak for themselves.  We're making that very --
Q    But --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  And I think the President has been very clear, as we've stated, that I think there’s enough there that we want the House and Senate intelligence to use the resources they do to make sure that they look into this matter.  I mean, that's -- there is -- anyway, I do not want to get ahead of where they may go with this or what they may look at, but I'm going to leave it to them.  If we start down the rabbit hole of discussing some of this stuff I think then we end up in a very difficult place.
I look forward to seeing you guys tomorrow.  If you can bring your cameras --
Q    Sean, housekeeping-wise, you said that we’d get some clarification on a number of questions -- to all of us.  If you could do that today through the pool -- 
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think we can try to do that through the pool.  If not, we'll write everything -- we generally write down everything and try to get back to the reporters.  So I will have the team -- and then get it out by the pool.
Q    Will we be hearing from the President this week, since we didn’t today?
MR. SPICER:  I'm sure at some point we'll do either something that we -- a photo spray or something.  I think that we have a pretty good track record of making the President available to folks.  
Q    -- kind of unusual.
MR. SPICER:  What’s unusual?  
Q    To not -- 
MR. SPICER:  It's Monday.
Q    Exactly.
Q    But you see -- everything is closed.  Normally we have a photo spray or something.
MR. SPICER:  I just -- I think that's -- don't give me this “normally we do.”  I made it very clear at the beginning of this, April, that we have some things on camera, some off.  Last week the President traveled two days, he had the joint session.  We briefed every single day --
Q    It’s not about us, it’s about the American public seeing their President.  And we have to -- 
MR. SPICER:  Wait, hold on.  Seeing their President.  The guy is in meetings all day.  I'm trying -- how many times did you complain about the President --
Q    He signed executive orders.  You had us -- last week you said -- 
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, hold on.  He signed an executive order.  I mean, this is a President, when it comes to accessibility and allowing the press access, I think I've heard from several of you -- we have gone above and beyond allowing the press into events, into sprays.  We've had greater access.  
So, with all due respect, I mean that's not been the case.  One day out of the last 41 or 40, whatever it's been -- but I think this President has been extremely accessible, extremely transparent, as far as -- he signed an executive order this morning that we then put all three Cabinet Secretaries that were relevant to implement this out.
I'll be out tomorrow.  I think we have an opportunity -- look, I made it very clear from the beginning of this that we’d have a briefing every day.  We've gaggled every day, we've made ourselves available to you.  So, with all due respect, that's not a very accurate assessment of how we've been acting.
Thanks.  I'll see you guys tomorrow.
END  
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 3/7/2017, #18
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
1:36 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Hey, guys.  I brought a guest.  Good afternoon.  First off, at the top, I want to acknowledge that there’s been an additional wave of threats to Jewish community centers and Anti-Defamation League offices.  According to some reports, there have been over a hundred bomb threats phoned in to Jewish institutions since the start of this year alone.  
As the President said at the beginning of his joint address, “We're a country that stands united in condemning hate and evil in all of its forms.  We denounce these latest anti-Semitic and hateful threats in the strongest terms.”  
It is incredibly saddening that I have to continue to share these disturbing reports with you, and I share the President’s thoughts that he fervently hopes that we don't continue to have to share these reports with you.  But as long as they will -- as long as they do continue, we'll continue to condemn them and look at ways in which we can stop them.
Now, on to news of the day.  You saw President Trump yesterday continue to deliver on two of his most significant campaign promises: protecting the country against radical Islamic terrorism, and repealing and replacing Obamacare with a patient-centric alternative.  
We talked a lot about the executive order protecting the nation from foreign terrorists entering the United States yesterday.  And so, on to Obamacare.  I'd like to introduce the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr. Tom Price, to come up and talk to you a little bit about the plan to repeal and replace Obamacare.
Dr. Price.
SECRETARY PRICE:  Thanks, Sean.  Good afternoon.  First, let me just share with you what an honor it is to serve as the Secretary of Health and Human Services.  I'm the third physician out of 23 individuals who’ve had the privilege of serving as the Secretary of Health and Human Services.  And the mission at our department is to improve the health and safety and well-being of the American people.  And we take that mission very, very seriously.
And for many Americans, right now, their ability to gain healthcare or health coverage is a real challenge.  For most Americans, they receive their health coverage through their employer.  It's about 175 million folks.  Those individuals will see no significant change other than there won't be a penalty for not purchasing coverage.  For the folks in the Medicare system, there will be no changes at all in the current law.  But we're talking about those people in the individual and small-group market, the moms and pops, the folks who run the corner grocery store, the corner cleaners.  Those individuals out there are having huge challenges gaining care and gaining coverage.
And then Medicaid is a program that by and large has decreased the ability for folks to gain access to care, and we want to make certain that we address that.
This is about patients.  This is not about money.  This is not about something else.  This is about patients.  And sadly, the costs are going up for those folks in the individual and small-group market.  The access is going down, and it's only getting worse.  You know the stories.  Premiums increased 25 percent over the last year, on average.  Arizona had an increase of 116 percent.  Deductibles are going up for many, many folks.  If you're a mom or a dad out there and you make $40,000, $50,000, $60,000, your deductible in this market, in that individual and small-group market, oftentimes is $8,000, $10,000, $12,000 a year.
What that means is you’ve got an insurance card but you don't get care because you can't afford the deductible.  And we know that this is happening by talking to the folks who are out there trying to provide the care.
A third of the counties in the United States -- one-third of the counties in the United States have only one insurer offering coverage on the exchange.  Five states only have one insurer offering coverage on the exchange.  One insurer is not a choice. So we need to make certain that we correct that.
In Tennessee this morning, it was announced that there are a number of counties that have no insurer offering coverage on the exchange.  Insurers are leaving the market on the exchange.  Last year there were 232 insurers that were providing coverage -- that were offering coverage on the exchange; now there are 167.  That's a loss of about 30 percent in one year alone.  And all of this means that patients are not getting the care that they need.
Now, the principles that we have as our guiding star are affordability, we want a system that’s affordable for everybody.  Accessibility, we need a system that’s accessible for everybody.  A system that’s of the highest quality, a system that incentivizes innovation in the healthcare system, and a system that empowers patients through both transparency and accountability.
The President spoke last week, last Tuesday to a joint session of Congress, and he laid out his principles.  First, wanted to make certain that those with preexisting illness and injury were not priced out of the market.  Nobody ought to lose their coverage because they get a bad diagnosis.
In terms of affordability, health savings accounts -- growing choices for patients is incredibly important.  Tax credits that allow individuals to be able to purchase the kind of coverage that they want, not that the government forces them to buy.  We’ve always talked about -- in terms of what kinds of reforms need to be put in place, that we need to equalize the tax treatment for the purchase of coverage.  
Those, again, in the employer-sponsored market, they get a tax benefit for buying health coverage.  Those folks that are out there in the individual and small-group market, no tax benefit.  And that’s what this plan would do.
State flexibility.  It’s incredibly important that we allow the states to be the ones that are defining what health coverage is, have the flexibility, especially in the Medicaid program, to be able to respond to their vulnerable population.
Lawsuit abuse.  The President mentioned, and it’s incredibly important, that -- the practice of defensive medicine wastes billions and billions of dollars every single year, and we need to make certain that we’re addressing that as well.  The President also talked about a glide path, an appropriate transition to this new phase for healthcare for our country, and that’s important as well so that nobody falls through the cracks.  
Buying across state lines, buying insurance across state lines.  The President talked about this on the campaign over and over.  The American people understand the commonsense nature of purchasing across state lines, and it increases competition.  And we need to make certain that that happens, and then addressing the incredible increase in drug prices.
There are three phases of this plan.  One is the bill that was introduced last evening in the House of Representatives.  That’s the start of all of this.  Second are the all the regulatory modifications and changes that can be put into place.  As you all well know, the previous administration used regulations to a fare-thee-well -- in fact, there were 192 specific rules that were put out as they relate to Obamacare, over 5,000 letters of guidance and the like.  And we are going to go through every single one of those and make certain that if they help patients, then we need to continue them.  If they harm patients or increase costs, then obviously they need to be addressed.  And then there’s other legislation that will need to be addressed that can’t be done through the reconciliation process.
So the goal of all of this is patient-centered healthcare, where patients and families and doctors are making medical decisions, and not the federal government.  We commend the House for the introduction of the bill yesterday and we look forward to working with all individuals in this process.  
And I look forward to a few questions.  Yes, sir.
Q    Mr. Secretary, you’re familiar from your time in the House with the clout that conservative groups like the Club for Growth and Heritage Action have with rank-and-file members.  What does it say about this legislation that these groups are already out with opposition to it?
SECRETARY PRICE:  Well, I think that this is the beginning of the process.  And we look forward to working with them and others to make certain that, again, we come up with that process that aligns with the principles that we’ve defined that they actually adhere to or agree with as well, and that is that we need a system that’s affordable for folks, a system that’s accessible for individuals, that’s of the highest quality, that incentivizes innovation, and that empowers patients.
And so we look forward to working with them through this process.
Q    Secretary, Congressman Chaffetz said today that Americans may need to forgo a new iPhone to pay for healthcare, and they’ll have to kind of make these choices.  Does the administration agree with that?  Will Americans under this plan -- will they need to maybe sacrifice other goods to pay for their healthcare?  
SECRETARY PRICE:  This is an important question, because what’s happening right now is that the American people are having to sacrifice in order to purchase coverage.  And, as I mentioned, many individuals can’t afford the kind of coverage that they have right now.  So they’ve got that insurance card but they don’t have care.  
What our desire is, is to drive down the healthcare costs for everybody.  And the way that you do that is to increase choices for folks, increase competition, return the regulation of healthcare where it ought to be, which is at the state level, not at the federal level.  All of these things that, taken in their aggregate, will in fact decrease the costs of healthcare and health coverage, and that will allow folks to be able to purchase the coverage that they want.
Yes, sir.
Q    Thank you, Dr. Price.  I have two questions for you.  First has to do with guarantees that you can make as the administration’s point person on this legislation.  Can you guarantee that whatever legislation emerges and makes it to the President’s desk will allow individuals, if they like their doctor they can keep their doctor?  And the second guarantee is, can you also guarantee that healthcare premiums for individuals will come down with this new legislation?
SECRETARY PRICE:  Again, a remarkably important question because, as you’ll recall, the promise from the last administration was if you like your doctor you can keep your doctor, if you like your plan you can keep your plan.  Both of those promises turned out to be not true.
We think it’s incredibly important for the American people to be able to select the physician and the place where they’re treated themselves, that the government ought not be involved in that process.  And so our goal is absolutely to make certain that individuals have the opportunity to select their physician.
In terms of premiums, we believe strongly that through this whole process and as it takes effect, that we’ll see a decrease in not only the premiums that individuals will see, but a decrease in the cost of healthcare for folks.  Remember, that was another promise that the previous administration made, that you’d see a decrease in $2,500 on average for families across this land; in fact, what they’ve seen is an increase of $2,500 or $3,000.
So we’re going to go in the other direction.  We’re going to go in a direction that empowers patients and holds down costs.  
Yes.
Q    Mr. Secretary, you are quite a distance away from conservatives with this plan in the central part of it, which is tax credits, which they see as yet another entitlement, very similar to the entitlement of Obamacare but different in form.  How do you convince them, since it’s going to take tax credits to make this work, that they need to swallow this and move forward with the bill?  I mean, you’re getting an awful lot of opposition on the central tenet of this whole thing.
SECRETARY PRICE:  This is all about patients.  And in order to provide that transition and in order to make it so that nobody falls through the cracks.  We've got to have a system that allows for individuals to gain the kind of coverage that they want.  
And we, conservatives and others, have said for a long, long time that we believe it's important to equalize the tax treatment for those purchasing coverage, gaining coverage through their employer, and those not.  And the tax credit is the opportunity to be able to equalize that tax treatment.  Folks have talked about this for many, many years, actually, so that there's not a distortion in the tax code for who's able to gain a benefit for being able to purchase coverage and not.
Q    Sir, Mr. Secretary, you were talking about making sure people don't fall through the cracks.  The last administration, with Obamacare, focused in on making sure the underserved were part of the equation.  What is the safety net or the safeguard that you have to make sure -- to ensure people don't fall through the cracks beyond the tax incentives, but also for the underserved, who are now part of -- many are now part of the program that weren't before, prior to Obamacare.
SECRETARY PRICE:  Yes, this is extremely important as well.  And the current system, as you likely know, for those vulnerable in our population, especially in the Medicaid population, this is a system that's broken.  You've got a third of the physicians in this country -- one-third of the doctors in this country that would be eligible to see Medicaid patients who aren't seeing Medicaid patients right now.  And it's not because they've forgotten how to take care of patients, it's because of the rules that are in place that make it too onerous or too difficult for them to see Medicaid patients.
So we believe that it's important to allow states to have that flexibility to fashion the program for their vulnerable population that actually responds to that population in a way that gives them the authority, them the choices, them the opportunity to gain coverage and the care that they believe most appropriate.
Q    What if you find out that that is not happening when you give it to the states?  Is there some type of punishment or some type of piece that you're going to put in place to make sure that that happens, that they follow through on your intent?
SECRETARY PRICE:  Yes, absolutely.  There's accountability throughout the plan that we have that would allow for the Secretary and the Department to be certain that the individuals that we believe need to be cared for are being cared for in the state at the appropriate level.  But we believe this is a partnership.  This is about patients and partnership.
The previous administration tended to make it about government.  We believe it's about patients and partnership, and we want to partner with every single person in this land who wants to make certain that we allow the kind of choices and quality to exist.
Q    The President tweeted earlier today.  He described this bill as "our wonderful new healthcare bill."  There's been a little bit of confusion.  Does this represent the administration's bill?  And is there anything in this bill that the administration cannot support?
SECRETARY PRICE:  This has been a work in progress.  As you know, this has been going on for over a year.  The work that I had the privilege of participating in when I served in the House of Representatives in the last Congress was open and transparent and we invited folks in to give their ideas.  And tens, if not hundreds, of people had input into that process.
This grew out of that, and over the past number of weeks, we've been having conversations with folks on the Hill, in the House and in the Senate, and other stakeholders.  And so this is a work product that is a result of all of that process.  The President and the administration support this step in the right -- what we believe is in the right direction, a step that repeals Obamacare and gets us moving in the direction of those principles that I outlined.
Q    Do you support everything that’s in that bill that's sitting on the table, sir?  Do you support everything that's in the bill sitting on the table, sir?
SECRETARY PRICE:  This is a work in progress and we'll work with the House and the Senate in this process.  As you know, it's a legislative process that occurs.  I'm glad you pointed out the bill is on the table there.  As you'll see, this bill right here was the bill that was introduced in 2009 and '10 by the previous administration.  Notice how thick that is.  Some of you will recall that I actually turned the pages and went through that piece of legislation in a YouTube.  The pile on the right is the current bill.  
And what it means is that we are making certain that the process, that the decisions that are going to be made are not going to be made by the federal government.  They're going to be made by patients and families and doctors.
One last --
Q    Mr. Secretary, given the opposition that John and others have brought up here today, does this plan already need to be salvaged in your view?  And how do you do it?
SECRETARY PRICE:  Oh, no.  You know what happens with these things.  You start at a starting point, people engage and they get involved in the process, sometimes to a greater degree.  Nothing focuses the mind like a bill that's currently on the table and that has a -- as a work in progress -- or in process.  And we’ll work through it. 
Q    So this is a starting point here?
SECRETARY PRICE:  This is an important process to be had.  The American people have said to their elected leaders that the Obamacare process for them gaining coverage and care is not working.  That's what they've said.  And so we believe it’s important to respond to the American people and provide a healthcare system that allows for them to purchase the kind of coverage and care that they desire.
Yes.
Q    You said in your letter to the House chairman that necessary technical and appropriate changes might need to be made for this bill to reach the President’s desk.  So what specific changes is the White House and the administration looking for in this bill?
SECRETARY PRICE:  Well, as I mentioned, there are three different phases to this process.  One is this bill, this legislation that's working through under the rules of reconciliation, which is a fancy term to mean that there are only certain things that you can do from a budgetary standpoint has to affect either spending or revenue.  There are things that you can't do in this bill, and those we plan on doing across the horizon in phase two, which is the regulatory portion, and then in phase three, which is another piece of legislation that would be going through the House and the Senate with a majority -- supermajority in the Senate.
That process will incorporate all of the kinds of things that we believe are absolutely necessary to reconstitute that individual and small-group market and to get us in a position, again, where patients and families and docs are making these decisions.
Q    Mr. Secretary, bearing in mind that the CBO score isn’t back yet, can you guarantee that this plan will not have a markedly negative impact on deficit or result in millions of Americans losing health insurance?
SECRETARY PRICE:  What I can say is that the goal and the desire I know of the individuals on the Hill is to make certain that this does not increase the cost to the federal government. 
Q    Mr. Secretary, two elements of the bill.  I have questions about how they control costs and how they help with access.  The Medicaid per-capita block grant through the states, how is that sort of fundamentally different from the Obamacare regime on Medicaid in terms of expanding access?
And then the second point, why doesn't this bill do away with the cost-sharing community ratings regime that Obamacare had?
SECRETARY PRICE:  So the per-capita cap, Medicaid, again, is a system that doesn't work for patients.  You’ve got folks out there who need care, who need to see particular physicians who aren’t able to see them.  All Americans should be saddened by the situation that we have when there are patients out there that can't get the care that they need.  We believe one of the keys to providing appropriate care in the Medicaid population is allowing the states to have the flexibility to address that Medicaid population.
Remember, Medicaid population is four different demographic groups.  It’s those who are disabled, it’s those who are seniors, it’s healthy moms and kids, by and large.  Those are the four main demographic groups.  And we, the federal government, force states, mostly, to take care of those individuals in exactly the same way.  If you describe that to the folks back home on Main Street, they say, that doesn't make any sense at all.  You need a program that's different for the healthy moms and kids to respond to their needs that's different than folks who are disabled and seniors.
And so what we believe is appropriate is to say to the states, you know your population best.  You know best how to care for your vulnerable population.  We're going to watch you and make certain that you do so, but you know how to do that.  And that will decrease costs markedly in the Medicaid program.  We're wasting significant amounts of money -- not that folks are getting too much care, we're wasting it because it’s inefficient and there’s significant abuse in the system. 
So in terms of the cost-sharing, I think that the cost-sharing measures are being addressed.  It's important that we run through that process.  This is the process where we felt the previous administration was spending money that they didn't have the authority to spend, and Congress is working through that to make certain that the rightful holders of the authority to spend money in this nation, which is the Congress of the United States, exercises that authority.
Q    How does the White House and you feel about the label “Trumpcare”?
SECRETARY PRICE:  I'll let others provide a description for it.  I prefer to call it patient care.  This is about patients at the end of the day.  This isn't about politicians.  This isn't about insurance companies.  This is about patients.  And patients in this nation, especially those in the individual and small-group market, these are the folks.
I had the privilege of going to Cincinnati last week with the Vice President to a small-business roundtable.  And one of the business owners, one of the small-business owners there, said he had 18 employees last year at this time.  This year, he has 15 employees -- not because he doesn't have the work, but because of the cost of health coverage for those individuals forced him -- forced him -- to let three people go.
Now, they're being forced to let three people go because the federal government has put in place rules and regulations that make it virtually impossible for folks in the individual and small-group market to provide coverage for their employees.  This is a system that's not working for people.  So if we focus on the patients -- I'll call it patient care.  If you focus on the patients, we'll get to the right answer.
Q    Mr. Secretary, a major complaint -- sorry -- a major complaint of conservatives with phase one of the Obamacare repeal-and-replace is that it is missing a measure that would allow healthcare to be sold across state lines.  Now, the President said this morning that that would be in either phase two or phase three.  Is that something that you believe the President could do through executive action, and then you yourself could do?  Or is that something that you believe has to be addressed legislatively?
SECRETARY PRICE:  There are different aspects to the purchase across state lines that will allow individuals to gain, again, the kind of choices that they want.  Some of this might be able to be done from a regulatory or a rules standpoint.  Some of it will require legislation, and that's where we're going to need the assistance of our friends on the other side of the aisle.  
The American people have demanded that they be able to purchase coverage across state lines, purchase coverage that they want for themselves.  So whether it's through association health plans, which allows individuals who are in small-business groups, like the fellow that I just mentioned, to pool together nationally to be able to purchase coverage, or whether it's mom and dad, who don't gain coverage through their employer through something called individual health pools that allows folks to pool together solely for the purpose of purchasing coverage, even though they're not otherwise economically aligned.  That allows people -- there are 18 million folks in that individual and small-group market.  That would allow those individuals to be able to purchase coverage and get the purchasing power of millions.  That's huge power and authority that we want to put in the hands of people, that we want to put in the hands of patients.  And some of that may, in fact, require legislation.
Yes, sir.
Q    Mr. Secretary, thank you.  Two questions but first, Congressman John Faso of New York has said that the issue of denying federal funds to Planned Parenthood should be separate from whatever healthcare bill finally emerges from Congress and is signed into law by the President.  Is that the administration's position as well?  
And my second question is this.  You mentioned earlier the people who had their  healthcare plans cancelled when they thought they could keep it.  I believe in your state of Georgia, more than a million people had that experience.  Will some of the plans that were cancelled be able to come back under the new healthcare plan?
SECRETARY PRICE:  Yeah, in terms of Planned Parenthood, we think it's important that the legislature work its will on this process.  It's incredibly important that we not violate anybody's conscience.  We want to protect the conscience provisions that exist.  It's also important to appreciate that through community health centers, the bill that's being proposed right now would allow greater access for women to healthcare in greater numbers of facilities across this land.  And they've actually proposed more money for women's healthcare than currently exists.  So I think that they're working their best to address that issue.
In terms of whether or not old plans that were available before might be available, absolutely.  And we believe that the opportunity to provide a robust market, robust choices for individuals across this land will be secured.  And, again, that's one of the keys to bringing down the premium costs, of bringing down the cost for health coverage.  So we're excited about that and look forward to that coming to pass.
Q    If the new plan calls for repealing the revenue-generating taxes and penalties but keeping the entitlements, how is that sustainable?
SECRETARY PRICE:  That's the work that somebody mentioned over here -- the Congressional Budget Office score, and once the Congress receives that score, then they'll be working through that to make certain that in fact it is fiscally responsible.  
Imagine, if you would, however, a system where the incentives within the system are all to drive down costs, to provide greater choices and competition for folks, and respond to the specific needs of patients.  And in so doing, what you do is actually get a much more efficient system for the provision and the delivery of healthcare.  It's a system we don't have right now because the previous administration felt that the government -- the federal government ought to do all of this.  And we've seen what came about when the federal government does all of that -- that it’s increasing premiums, increasing deductibles, decreasing choices.  You've got a card that says you've got insurance, and you walk in, and you can't afford what it is that's trying to -- for the doctor that's trying to take care of you.
So this is not a system that's working for folks in that individual and small-group market and in the exchanges.
Q    Mr. Secretary, many have complained that Obamacare resulted in higher wait times in the emergency room.  Will this new bill cause that?  Have you have any idea on that?
SECRETARY PRICE:  One of the things that the previous administration said was that they were going to be able to drive folks away from one of the most expensive areas for the provision of healthcare, and that is the emergency rooms.  In fact, they did just the opposite.  And much of that is because of, again, the rules and the regulations that they put in place.  
So from our perspective, we believe that if individuals are able to purchase the kind of coverage that they want, then they'll have access to the kind of doctors and other providers that they desire, and won't need to be able to be seen in the emergency room.  They'll already have the care.  Emergency rooms ought to be for emergencies, not for the standard care that individuals tend to receive right now.  
So we believe that if you put in place the right system, then emergency rooms and emergency physicians will be able to have the opportunity to care for those individuals that appropriately present to their department.
Q    Mr. Secretary, I'm interested in following up on your comment that it's important that no one vote on anything that violates their conscience.  Federal funding already can't be used for abortions, but are you saying that the administration has a position on provision of birth control at these community health centers?  And secondly, is the administration looking to actively withhold funding to Planned Parenthood if they continue to provide abortions, as has been reported?
SECRETARY PRICE:  We're working through all of those issues.  As you know, many of those were through the rule-making process and we're working through that.  So that's not a part of this piece of legislation right here.
Q    But you don’t have a view on provision of birth control and access to it?  When you're talking about women's healthcare, which you brought up, and saying you wanted to expand more community funding.
SECRETARY PRICE:  Yeah, what we're doing, as I say, is working through the rules and the regulations to see where the previous administration was, see how they did it, and whether or not it needs to be addressed.  With the understanding that what we believe is important when we look at the rules and regulations is to define whether or not that rule or regulation actually helps patients and decreases costs, or harms patients and increases costs.  If it does the latter, then we need to do away it.  If it does the former, then we ought to accentuate it.  
Q    What was the issue of conscience you were talking about?  What was the issue of conscience you were talking about then?
SECRETARY PRICE:  To make certain that individuals in the market are not forced to do things that violate their conscience.
Yes, sir.
Q    Secretary, thank you, sir.  Common people and the small businesses have been waiting for this new bill under President Trump.  So any message, sir, for them?
SECRETARY PRICE:  Well, I think that this is the culmination of years of work.  It's the culmination of years of concern and frustration by the American people.  They knew at the time that the previous bill -- the previous law passed that it wasn't going to help them.  They knew that costs were going to go up.  In fact, we predicted at the time that costs would go up and that access would go down.  And so this is the culmination of years of hard work by the electorate, by the citizens of this country to say that we want a system, again, that respects patients and families and doctors in these decisions.
One more.
Q    Thank you, Mr. Secretary.  The President tweeted out earlier today that he believes that he’s working on a plan to have drug prices come down by spurring competition.  Can you tell us a little bit about what that plan is going to be, when it might be rolled out?  Is it part of these phases?  And then the second question, the bill also includes a tax break for insurance executives that make more than $500,000.  You said this is about patients.  Why is that tax break important for this legislation?
SECRETARY PRICE:  To the latter, I'm not aware of that.  I'll look into that.
Drug pricing is really important.  So many individuals are now having significant difficulty being able to afford the medications that they’ve been prescribed.  And it's not able to be addressed specifically in this phase one because it's not a revenue or spending issue for the federal government.  So it can't be in this phase one.
But in phase two and three -- which may be concurrent along with this phase one -- but in phase two and three, then we look forward to bringing solutions, to solve the remarkable challenge that patients have across this line with the increase in pricing of drugs.  
I've got to run.  You’ve got a guy right here who is going to answer all the rest of the questions.  Thank you so much.  God bless you.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you, Dr. Price.
Let me just kind of continue on.  The bottom line I think that the Secretary was making is that Obamacare sought to cover 20 million people and in the process it drove up costs for everybody, whether or not you were in the exchange or not.  Most people get their insurance through their employers.  Older populations get their healthcare through Medicare.  Low-income populations get their healthcare through Medicaid.  And veterans get their insurance through TRICARE.  So what we're talking about here is a very defined amount of individuals that we’re trying to address and not affect the entire system.
Obamacare turned our healthcare system on its head to address the pool of individuals who don't fall into any of the buckets that I mentioned.  Our plan that we're talking about today with the House will ensure that those individuals receive the care that they need if they want an affordable cost while not sending rates skyrocketing.
Obamacare was an overcomplicated bill that served the special interests and not the American people.  These over 974 pages that were passed and then we were told we had to read them are filled with carve-outs by over $1 billion of healthcare- related lobbying that were spent on the year that Obamacare was crafted.  
Our plan, in far fewer pages, 123 -- much smaller, much bigger -- so far we're at 57 for the repeal plan and 66 pages for the replacement portion.  We'll undo this.  And remember, half of it, 57 of those pages, are the repeal part.  So when you really get down to it, our plan is 66 pages long, half of what we actually even have there.  We'll undo the massive disaster and replace it with a plan to return healthcare back to the patient.
As the President outlined in his joint address, he expects five core principles to guide Congress through this healthcare process.  First, ensure that the American people with preexisting conditions have access to coverage.  Second, ensure a stable transition for Americans currently enrolled in the exchanges.  Third, provide more equitable tax treatment through tax credits for people who already don't receive tax-advantage healthcare from their employer.  And I know -- something that Secretary Price was talking about -- for the vast number of people who get their insurance through their employer, they’re getting it tax free.  They are not taxed on that benefit, which is something that is not afforded to people who are in the individual market who either run a small business or are sole proprietors.
Fourth, we should expand the power of health savings accounts to return control to Americans over their healthcare dollar and decisions.  They should be able to choose the plan they want, not the plan that's forced on them by government.  And finally, we should give our state governors the resources and flexibility they need with Medicare to make sure that no one is left out.  
This is the Obamacare replacement plan that everyone has been asking for, the plan that the President ran on, and the plan that will ultimately save the system.  It's also a culmination of years of dedicated work and careful thought by Republicans to find a replacement that will best undo the damage that's been caused by Obamacare while ensuring that all Americans have peace of mind during this stable transition period.
These are the principles for which conservatives have been fighting for for years.  President Trump looks forward to continuing the dialogue between the administration and the Hill on saving the healthcare system.
What’s important to remember is that we’re not going to be able to do all of this on one bill.  As the Secretary mentioned, there are two other steps as well that allow us to get more of the President's plan accomplished after we pass this first important, major step. 
The second piece is already underway, and that's what Secretary Price can do through executive action.  He has already rolled out a handful of important actions, including the major marketplace stabilization regulation, to help bring stability to the collapsing insurance market.  He’ll continue to enact a number of policy changes in the regulatory and administration space -- administrative space to achieve what the first step cannot because of the nature of reconciliation.
The third piece of executing the President's healthcare plan is on -- requires 60 votes in legislation, maybe more depending on what we can do and when.  That's how we'll move forward on the policies of purchasing across state lines, lowering drug prices -- that just came up -- and repealing any of Obamacare's premium-spiking insurance market distortions that can't be done through this current bill. 
Also, yesterday, in addition to speaking with Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu, the President also had separate calls with Prime Minister of Japan, Abe, and South Korea’s Acting President Hwang.  During both of these calls the President reiterated the United States’ ironclad commitment to stand with Japan and South Korea in the face of the serious threat posed by North Korea. 
He also emphasized that the administration is taking steps to further enhance our ability to deter and defend against North Korea’s ballistic missiles using a full range of the United States’ military capabilities. 
Moving on to today’s schedule.  This morning, the President had a call with President Kenyatta of Kenya.  We’ll have a readout for that call soon, if it’s not already out.  The President and First Lady also announced the official reopening of public tours here at the White House.  You may have seen the President stop by to surprise greet some of the first visitors on their tour.  We’re looking forward to welcoming the people back to -- the American people back what is affectionately referred to as the “People’s House.” 
We are the world’s only executive residence and office of head of state that also serves as a museum free to the people.  Visiting the White House is obviously an experience that’s uniquely American, and we encourage guests of all ages to come visit the White House, their house.
Also this morning, the Secretary of Commerce, Wilbur Ross, held a press conference announcing that Chinese ZTE Corporation has agreed to a record-high, combined criminal and civil penalty of $1.19 billion after the company illegally shipped telecommunications equipment to Iran and North Korea in violation of sanctions.  This civil penalty is the largest ever imposed by the Commerce Department’s Bureau of Industry and Security and, pending approval from a federal judge, the combined penalties between the Commerce Department, the Department of Justice, and the Department of Treasury would be the largest fine and forfeiture ever levied by the U.S. government in such a case.
This settlement tells the world that the days of flouting the U.S. sanctions regime or violating U.S. trade laws are over.
President Trump is committed to ending the disrespect of American laws and American workers.
So back to the schedule for a second.  This morning the President also received his daily intelligence briefing.  He had lunch with Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, who will continue to be an important partner as the President’s nominee for Supreme Court, Judge Gorsuch, begins the confirmation process in the next couple weeks.
At this moment, the President is leading a discussion on immigration with Senator Cotton and Senator Perdue and members of White House senior staff.  The President and the senators are expected to discuss the merit-based immigration reforms that the President mentioned at last week’s joint address.  
Later this afternoon, the President will lead a meeting with the House Deputy Whip Team focused on repeal and replace of Obamacare.  There will be a pool spray at the top of that meeting.  The gather time is 3:20 p.m.  The President will also meet with Richard Trumka, President of the AFL-CIO.  They’re expected to discuss the importance of investing in our country’s infrastructure and renegotiating trade agreements like NAFTA.  There will also be a pool spray at the top of that meeting, and we’ll have further details on it.
This evening, the President will visit with a group of Boy Scouts who are in Washington to participate in a near-century-old tradition of sharing scouting’s achievement with key government officials.  Looking ahead, I want to let you know that the President will be welcoming at least two foreign leaders in the coming weeks, and I expect additional announcements of additional leaders later.  But first, next week, Chancellor Merkel of Germany will visit the White House.  And the following week, the President will welcome Prime Minister al-Abadi of Iraq.  
With that, I’ll kick it off with your questions.  Jonathan Karl.
Q    Sean, it’s been a full --
MR. SPICER:  Jonathan.
Q    Thank you.  (Laughter.)  Sean, it’s been a full --
MR. SPICER:  You’re out of practice.
Q    I know.  (Laughter.)  It’s been a full three days since the President said that President Obama had his wires tapped, his phones tapped at Trump Tower.  In those three days, has the White House come up with any evidence whatsoever to prove that allegation?
MR. SPICER:  I addressed this multiple times yesterday.  I think the President -- we put out a statement on Sunday saying that we would have no further comment and we were asking the House and the Senate intelligence committees to look into this concern and report back.
Q    Can’t the President just ask the FBI director if this happened?  Has he asked him?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I think -- no, the President has not.  And I think that we’ve gone back and forth with you guys -- I think there is clearly a role that Congress can play in its oversight capabilities.  They’ve made it very clear that they have the staff, the resources and the process.  I think that’s the appropriate place for this to handle.  I think if we were to start to get involved you would then write stories about how we were getting involved.
So it’s a no-win situation.  I think the smartest and most deliberative way to address this situation is to ask the House and Senate intelligence committees who are already in the process of looking into this to look into this and other leaks of classified information that are troubling to our nation’s national security.
So, as the President said in the statement on Sunday, we believe that that investigation, as well as the investigation of other classified leaks and other important information that threatens our national security, be looked into by the House and Senate intelligence committees, and then we encourage them to report back.
Q    Do you believe that President Obama ordered something like this?
MR. SPICER:  I get that that’s a cute question to ask.  My job is to represent the President and to talk about what he’s doing and what he wants.  And he has made very clear what his goal is, what he would like to have happen.  And so I’ll just leave it at that.  I think we’ve tried to play this game before.  I’m not here to speak for myself, I’m here to speak for the President of the United States and our government.
Zeke.
Q    Sean, one follow-up on what Secretary Price said earlier.  I think he was asked by John about whether the administration was willing to make a -- for the American people right now who like their doctor or like their health insurance plan, is the White House willing to make a commitment then today that when this replacement bill is passed, if it passes, that they will at the end of that be able to keep their doctor and keep their healthcare plan?
And secondly, just changing gears radically onto -- China overnight issued some strong rhetoric promising consequences for the deployment of the THAAD missile system to South Korea.  If you could respond to that.
MR. SPICER:  So on the first piece, I think -- look, one of the things that’s important to understand about this process that’s very different from when the Democrats did it -- you’ll recall then-Speaker Pelosi said you’re going to have to read the bill to know what’s in it.  I think there’s a big difference.
This is the bill.  It’s right here.  It’s on the website.  We’re going through regular order.  If you go to the House of Representatives website, Speaker Paul Ryan’s website, it’s listed.  Everybody can read it, and it’s going to go through what they call regular order.  We’re not jamming this down anybody’s throat.  It’s going to go through a committee process.  All parties involved, all representatives in the House will be able to have input into it.  
I think that’s the way to conduct this process, is to do it to allow people to watch the process happen in the committees, allow members of Congress to have their input in it, to make amendments, to see that we get the best bill that achieves the goal for the American people.
When it was done the last time, it was jammed down people’s throat, and look what happened.  You had 974 pages that people struggled to read afterwards and figure out what had just gotten passed, and the consequences were, frankly, devastating.
So to your point about keeping your doctor, in a lot of cases you’ve lost your doctor for a couple of reasons.  One, they may not participate in the plan.  They may not take insurance at all anymore.  Two, they may not take Medicaid -- or three, they may not take Medicaid.  And the list goes on and on about why they might not be there -- or your plan, the plan that you got is no longer accessible.  
As the Secretary mentioned, one-third of all counties in the United States no longer take Medicaid -- or, excuse me, have only one plan that you can choose from.  So it’s a fact right now that you -- in most cases, you have no choice.  In many cases, you’ve lost that ability.  
Our goal is to actually add more choice and more competition.  Right now, the government tells you, you must have this plan or you will pay a penalty, and within this plan, here’s what you have to have.  We’ve lost the element of choice and competition in healthcare, and by bringing all of that back, I think there’s a higher degree of likelihood that you’re going to get the plan that you want and you’re going to get the doctor you want.  Because it will be your choice, not the government’s choice.
And that’s a big, big difference.  This plan was jammed down everybody’s throat, and the consequences took their plans away, it took their doctors away, and it drove up costs.  This plan allows more competition, more people to enter it, and the American people and patients to make a decision on what plan they want.  If they have a plan and a doctor they like, then they’re going to choose a plan that allows them to continue with that doctor.  But there’s going to be more competition and more choice, not less.  And that’s, frankly, what you have now.  
With respect to China, I think I addressed this yesterday.  We stand shoulder to shoulder with Japan and South Korea in doing what we can to protect that region in particular from an attack from North Korea.  We understand the situation and we continue to work with them.  As I’ve mentioned, the President spoke to both leaders yesterday.  We provided a readout of those calls.  But we obviously understand the concerns of China, but -- this is a national security issue for them.
Hunter.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  How concerned is the President with the situation between North Korea and Malaysia right now?
MR. SPICER:  Well, as I said, I think we're very well aware of the -- what’s going on in the region.  The President obviously had a conversation with, in particular, the leader -- the acting President of South Korea last night with respect to what’s going on there.  And again, I’ll refer that to the National Security Committee to give you further -- Cheryl Bolen.
Q    Thanks, Sean.
MR. SPICER:  Cheryl.  I know, sorry, I forgot you yesterday. 
Q    I appreciate it.  So two questions.  One on healthcare.  If the CBO scores this bill and it does not provide the amount of coverage that the Affordable Care Act did, will the President still support it?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I’m not going to get ahead -- Secretary Price mentioned this -- let’s not get ahead of the CBO going through this.  But I think, as I mentioned to Zeke, one of the things that's important to understand there’s -- this is -- this bill has to be done in the phases that it has to to address the repeal part of it, and the replace part of it.
There are only certain things that we can do through reconciliation.  I know there’s the regulatory piece that we can do through actions that the Secretary is empowered to do, frankly, under Obamacare.  And then third is an additional piece of legislation that addresses things.
But there are cost-saving measures that -- and competition aspects of this that have to be included in phase two or three because they're not allowed in the reconciliation bill because of the nature of how reconciliation works on Capitol Hill.
So I think that one of the things that we have to understand is that how that score comes out from the Congressional Budget Office will depend on whether they look at it specifically with just a phase one or whether they look at it in its totality.  But I’m confident that if you look at what’s going on right now, Cheryl, it’s unsustainable.  Premiums in state after state, as Dr. Price mentioned, they're up 25 percent on average.  Arizona is 116 percent.  I think Oklahoma is the 50s.  Minnesota is in the 40s.  This is unsustainable for a family to continue to pay the premiums that they have and for individuals, small-business owners, et cetera. 
So the question is, can we allow people to go on this trajectory where more and more of their paycheck is getting eaten up in a plan that's, frankly, not giving them choice, doctors, or plans that they want.  This plan I think clearly achieves those goals a lot better.  It gets the price -- cost containment down.  It gets price control under it.  And it allows doctors and plans to reengage in the marketplace, as they were prior to this.  And I think that is a major aspect of it.
Hold on.  Cheryl waited.
Q    Thank you.  From yesterday, I had a nominations question.  Is there something that's preventing the White House from submitting the nominations of Sonny Perdue for Agriculture and Alex Acosta for Labor?
MR. SPICER:  I believe Alex Acosta was sent up to the Hill earlier today.  We should have an announcement officially out.  So sometimes there’s a little bit of a lag.  I apologize between my office and -- but that one is up, and I’ll check on Sonny Perdue.  I think some of it is just in coordination with the Senate, so pardon my time. 
Q    Thanks, Sean.  I have two questions for you.  First, will the President offer a correction to his tweet this morning that states that 122 prisoners were released from Gitmo by the Obama administration and then returned to the battlefield?  Can you take that first?
MR. SPICER:  Yes, I mean, obviously the President meant in totality the number that had been released on the battlefield -- that have been released from Gitmo since -- individuals have been released.  So that is correct. 
Q    Then my second question.  Is the White House concerned about this new information that came out in WikiLeaks today that U.S. intelligence agencies are potentially, purposely providing vulnerabilities to tech products here in the United States?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to comment on that.  I think obviously that's something that has not been fully evaluated, and if it was, I would not comment from here on that.
Kevin.
Q    Yes, Sean, I was going to ask about branding.  The President in the past put his name on buildings and different products.  When it comes to healthcare, does the White House feel that the bill presented today should be known as “Trumpcare” from here on out?  I know it was asked of the Secretary.  And at what point do you think that the transition should go away from Obamacare to the new administration?
MR. SPICER:  Well, as soon as it’s repealed we can get rid of that.  I think that will happen quickly. 
And as Secretary Price mentioned, I think we're less concerned with labels right now and more in terms of action and results.  And I think that's what our focus has been is getting that cost down, getting that choice back that we mentioned.  Yeah.
Q    Sean, DHS is reportedly considering separating families that cross the border illegally.  How does the President feel about that? 
MR. SPICER:  I’m going to -- that's a DHS matter.  We don't get involved in either Customs or ICE enforcement.  So I think that's a question better reserved to both DHS and ICE specifically.
Jim.
Q    Oh, thanks, Sean.  On the Obamacare question, one of the criticisms on this is that there is still a de facto individual mandate because it allows insurance companies to increase premiums up to 30 percent of people -- if there’s a gap in coverage.  And I have one more.  
MR. SPICER:  Well, that's not -- the difference is under the current bill that's here, if you don't buy insurance, you pay a fine.  Under the current bill you don't have -- there’s nothing that mandates you to buy insurance.  That's up to an individual.  So by its very definition, it is not -- can't be considered that.
What’s your second one?
Q    Well, you don't think it’s a de facto mandate in the sense of there’s a penalty --
MR. SPICER:  It can't be.
Q    -- in place as there is now?  Not by the government, but is by the insurance companies.
MR. SPICER:  Right.  But there’s no -- I think you answered your own question on that one.  
Q    I have one more.
MR. SPICER:  Okay.
Q    Another topic.  The President has blamed the Democrats in the Senate for blocking the Cabinet.  Last Thursday, the Republicans actually called a recess early -- adjourned on Thursday early.  Previously they called a recess the week before.  Does the President have any plans to call for the Senate to remain in session and the Congress to stay in session until they approve the nominees and maybe even also repeal Obamacare?
MR. SPICER:  This isn’t a Republican issue.  I mean it’s not Republicans that are playing beat the clock on a lot of these nominees.  And we've discussed this since the transition time.  There were several nominees that, frankly, weren’t even considered controversial by the standards of Senate Democratic leadership, and yet have been held up over and over again.  I don't think -- that's a very different scenario than going back and being with constituents, which was on the Senate schedule.  So I don't think -- that's a synonymous thing.
Do we have Michael Medved ready to go for a Skype question?  Michael? 
Q    Yes, hello.  Sean, thank you very much.  Obviously, today there was a big emphasis on Obamacare, which is profoundly important to the American people.  But it seems that too often in the last several weeks, the administration has gotten distracted and media have gotten distracted by talk of wiretapping at Trump Tower, or the President calling his predecessor a “bad” and “sick guy” or criticizing the ratings of “Celebrity Apprentice.”  Do you think the White House could do a better job of focusing on the issues that really matter, the reforms that matter to the American people rather than getting distracted to these subsidiary conflicts as we move forward into the coming months?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Michael.  Respectfully, I would say that we have been focused.  We're here talking about Obamacare and the need to drive down the cost and access for healthcare for every American.  I think that's a pretty significant thing to be focused on.
Yesterday, we were talking about the President’s effort to continue to keep the nation safe, to make sure that people aren’t coming into the country who aren’t here for peaceful purposes.  The President has talked to almost 50 world leaders.  He’s had 30-plus executive actions on all sorts of stuff from regulatory aspects to things that will create more jobs.  I think that's a fairly focused effort.
That being said, I think, look, whether it was Candidate Trump, President-elect Trump, or now President Trump, the President has always made it very clear -- or not he made it clear, but I think the voters made it clear that one of the things that they appreciate about him is his ability to be authentic and to speak very forcefully and very directly with the American people.  And that's an aspect that I think was central to why he was elected, is because he’s not a canned politician that's going to give the same staid answers over and over again.
Sara.
Q    Going back to Fred’s question, conservatives have started to call this “Obamacare Lite.”  But President Trump has promised to fully repeal Obamacare, but this bill leaves a lot of the structure of Obamacare intact.  If this is the policy that passes, is President Trump confident in the future he can say that he fully repealed Obamacare?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, absolutely.  As I mentioned, the first half of the bill that we put forward repeals it.  There are three things, I mean -- each phase that we've talked about, phase one, phase two, and phase three, there’s a repeal-and-replace aspect in each one.  But Republicans and conservatives have been talking about adding competition and driving costs down for decades now, selling across state lines, small-business pooling.  All of those things have been part of conservative plans for a long time.  And I think instilling that competition in it, allowing more access -- I think there is a big difference.  
There is no -- we have for the longest time -- if you're a conservative, you think about this right now that you have -- anyone who has an employer-based -- their job comes from an employer that gives them healthcare, they're getting a subsidy.  They're getting a credit.  They don't pay taxes on their healthcare, and their employer doesn't either.  That's a huge disadvantage to anyone who is a sole proprietor or owns a small business.  
And so, frankly, to allow the playing field to be leveled and allow small businesses, which are, frankly, the job creators in this country, to allow entrepreneurs and self-starters to get the same tax treatment that a Fortune 500 company gets you is a very conservative principle.
And again, look, one of the things that's important, Sara, is for all of the people who have concerns about this -- especially on the right -- look at the size.  This is the Democrats, this is us.  You can't get any clearer in terms of this is government, this is not.
And I think that part of the reason the visual is important is that when you actually look at the difference, you realize this is what big government does.  It crowds out competition.  It drives up prices.  It stifles entrepreneurship and innovation.  Doctors leaving the markets.  More and more people not taking Medicaid or TRICARE.  That should concern people.  When you've got veterans that can't -- because most of the time, Medicaid and TRICARE are tied together.  So when you have those systems not accepted by doctors, that means the lowest of our -- people on the low-income scale and people who have served our country have fewer and fewer choices.  That alone should be a problem and concerning for many people.  
But the premium spikes are another problem.  Because again, even if you're in the exchange, now you're seeing over and over again that happen.  You're also seeing young people decide that they’d rather just pay a penalty because the cost of those basic programs is out of reach for a lot of young people who are just entering the job market.
But again, I think the greatest illustration of the differences in the approaches is that size.  Our bill, which is a tenth of the size, does repeal and replace in what their bill just did in massive government bureaucracy.  And that is a big difference.  
Jim.
Q    Just want to ask you -- I mean you had the Health and Human Services Secretary out here, you just talked about this is the Republican bill, this is the Democrat bill.  Is that the President’s bill?  Is that his healthcare bill?
Q    That is a bill that we have worked with with Congress. We feel very good about where it is.  We are looking forward -- as I mentioned earlier, the President is meeting with the Whip Team to encourage them to support it and to build it out.  I don't think -- and I'm not trying to be cute here -- but I think it's not his bill or their bill.  It's a bill that we have worked on with them together.  We're very proud of where it stands now.
The big difference, Jim, is that, unlike before, as I mentioned, when the Democrats jammed it down people’s throat and said -- waited to get that 60th vote, with Senator Kennedy still around, and then basically said, literally, you will have to wait and see what it looks like before we passed it -- we not only posted it out there for everybody to look at, but by sending it through regular order, not just putting it up for a House vote, but sending it through the committee process, allows Republicans, Democrats, and independents alike to offer up amendments and suggestions.  And the House will work its will.
Now, we will continue to give guidance and thoughts and suggestions.  But I think the President’s core principles are what’s going to guide us as we head through the Hill and then -- the House and then to the Senate.
Q    And just one quick follow-up on Jonathan Karl’s question, because the President made a very serious allegation over the weekend, and I think we would all be remiss if we went through this briefing and not tried to get you on camera to at least offer us some evidence.  Where is the evidence, where is the proof that President Obama bugged President Trump?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I answered this question yesterday on camera on your air.  So just so we're clear -- I know this is now -- it will be twice.  But I think I made it clear yesterday --
Q    But since yesterday, since yesterday --
MR. SPICER:  Nothing has changed.
Q    -- is there any new proof --
MR. SPICER:  No.  And it's not a question of new proof or less proof, or whatever.  The answer is the same, which is that I think that there is a concern about what happened in the 2016 election.  The House and Senate intelligence committees have the staff and the capabilities and the processes in place to look at this in a way that's objective.  And that's where it should be done.  And, frankly, if you’ve seen the response from -- especially on the House side, but as well as the Senate, they welcome this.
And so let’s let the Senate do their job and the House -- excuse me -- intelligence committees, and then report back to the American people.
Q    Will the President withdraw the accusation?  Does he have any --
MR. SPICER:  Why would he withdraw it until it's adjudicated?  That's what we're asking, is for them to look at this and see if there is --
Q    No regrets with him about raising this accusation?
MR. SPICER:  No.  Absolutely not.  And I think that what he wants them to do is to look into wiretapping, other surveillance, and again, as I mentioned before, the other leaks that are threatening our national security.  You're seeing the leaks happen over and over again that come out throughout the administration, throughout government, and undermine national security.  And I think the appropriate thing to do is to ask the House and the Senate to look into it.
Glenn Thrush.
Q    To follow up on a follow-up, in terms of -- you were given the opportunity on air to say whether or not the President still supported Director Comey.  Does the President support Director Comey?  And I have a quick follow-up.
MR. SPICER:  I have no reason to believe he doesn’t.  He has not suggested that to me.  So now to the non-follow-up to the --
Q    Have you seen any evidence yourself?  Has the evidence been shared with you or other senior members of the President’s staff as to why he made this particular accusation?
MR. SPICER:  As far as me, no.  I'm not in a position that that would be regularly part of my daily duties for the President to sit down and go through that.  That's probably a level above my pay grade.  But as I’ve mentioned, I think the President believes that the appropriate place for this to be adjudicated is for the House and Senate intelligence committees who have the clearances, the staff, the processes, to go through this, look at it and report back.
Q    Did he share it with --
MR. SPICER:  I'm not going to get in -- as the President made very clear, Glenn --
Q    -- with his National Security Advisor?
MR. SPICER:  As the President said in the statement that he issued on Sunday, we're not going to have further comment on this until this matter is resolved.
Yes.
Q    Two quick questions.  So just to follow up on the follow-up.  So does the White House feel that it's appropriate -- you say that you want it to be adjudicated by the congressional committees, but the President made declarative statements on Twitter.
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    So I guess, is the White House position that the President can make declarative statements about a former President basically committing a crime and then the congressional committees should look into that and basically prove it?  I mean, how does that exactly --
MR. SPICER:  I take issue with -- it's not a question of “prove it.”  I think as I said, now, five times to a follow-up to a follow-up, that it's not a question of “prove it.”  It's that they have the resources and the clearances and the staff to fully and thoroughly and comprehensively investigate this and then issue a report as to what their findings are.  
Q    But President Trump’s Twitter statement shouldn’t be taken at face value about what --
MR. SPICER:  Sure it should.  Of course, it -- I mean, why 
-- no.  There’s nothing -- as I mentioned to Jim, it's not that he’s walking anything back or regretting.  He’s just saying that they have the appropriate venue and capabilities to review this.
Margaret.  I'm sorry.
Q    So on the Obamacare replacement, so you said that it will be in phases and that you're going to need additional legislation.  So just to clarify, are the cost savings that you guys are projecting, is that dependent on phase three of the national competition plan?  Because if that’s the case then --  
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, well, it's not dependent.  I think that in order to see it fully come to fruition, yeah, you have to see all parts of it.  But the way that it was passed doesn't allow for -- the way that it was passed is almost the same way that we're going through this now, which is they pass certain things, then the Secretary of Health and Human Services, at the time, was granted significant regulatory authority that allowed her to do certain things at the time to implement pieces of Obamacare that we now have to act backwards and go almost in the same steps to do what they did to lay it out.  We've got to repeal it, and then we've got to replace it with the plan that's going to do the same. 
Certain things can be done in the same way and certain things can't.  It just -- it literally depends on how that was done.
John Frederick.
Q    Sean, in the replacement plan, it says that the states that accepted the Medicare expansion money would continue to be funded.  So what is the message you have to Republican state legislators that thought they were fiscally responsible in rejecting Medicaid expansion in their states and now they didn't get the federal dollars on either end?  What is your response to them?
MR. SPICER:  I think what we need to do is to make sure, as the President said in his statements, as Secretary Price did, we've got to make sure that we continue to protect people through this transition process.  Let the bill work its way.  But this is the first time -- as we address the Medicaid portion of this, this is probably the first time that we've really addressed an entitlement aspect of something in almost 30 years.  So I think we've got to let this piece of it work its way through the House.
But there is -- remember, one of the things that happened through the Medicaid expansion was the goal has always been about Medicaid to help people who were disabled or poor or met a specific number of criteria.  For the first time in Obamacare, we expanded Obamacare -- or the Obama administration did, rather -- to able-bodied individuals that -- in a way that had never been done before, and it was not a specific class.  That's led largely to the ballooning cost.
I think a lot of the reforms that will be contained in this bill will address that, but I think we've got to let it work its will through the process.
Alexis.
Q    Sean, I want to ask you two communications questions on two topics.  Because the President gave himself a middling grade on communication, let me ask you about the experience that the previous administration had when Obamacare was going through its own phases.  The President -- President Obama said that the opposition to the legislation was able to seize the opportunity while it was being legislated to create public perceptions about what was in the legislation.  So my question is on ACA.  What is the President going to do to improve his communications, to be out there, explaining what is in the bill, to work with lawmakers?  That's the first question.  And then I'll ask you the next one.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, thank you.  So on the first one, as I’ve mentioned, he’s had and continues to have significant outreach to members of Congress.  He's talked to health insurers.  I mean, I think we've read out a lot of the activities of the last couple weeks.  And literally, in just -- within an hour, he's going to sit down with the House Deputy Whip Team to talk about the legislative piece of this in the House.
So this is going to be a very aggressive, laser-like focus of this administration over the next month or two to get this thing through the House and then moved over to the Senate.  But there's a big difference, Alexis.  What we're doing is vastly different.  They were expanding government, promising people something.  And I think what's happened is there was a lot of difference with how they approach it.  
Right now, the American people, no matter where you are, you understand the state of your healthcare, the costs that you're seeing and the lack of choice that you've now been presented with.  And in many cases, you realize that when you go in to see the doctor or a loved one is going to see a doctor that they're not getting -- they're not either able to get in, they're not taking the Medicare or the exchange insurance that they got, the costs are going out of control.  
And I think it's really interesting -- I mean, one of the things that Dr. Price mentioned that is so apropos of this is, having a card does not mean you have insurance.  It's like handing someone a blank check -- it doesn't mean that you have money, it means you have a check.  And I think what we've seen over the last few years with Obamacare is you can have an insurance card, but that doesn't mean someone is going to take it, and it sure doesn't mean that it's going to be affordable.  And there's a big difference between having a card and having healthcare that's affordable.  And that's the difference that we're trying to solve right now.  
So when it comes to communication, I think one of the things that's really helpful is that part of the sell is done for us.  The American people understand the state of their healthcare.  They understand how much they're paying for.  They've gone to see a doctor or gone to a hospital or had a notice from their carrier saying we are no longer part of this, or their employer says, hey, whatever your particular carrier is, is no longer available, we're switching you into this.  
And so for so many Americans, healthcare is a very, very real part of their daily experience because they're caring for themselves, they're dealing with an ailment, or dealing with children or a loved one or someone else in their family where they're seeing, firsthand, the devastation and disaster that Obamacare has caused them in their personal life.  
So I think there's a welcoming of this effort and I think it's a lot easier for us to go in -- because we don't have to explain the problem.  People are living it.  And I think for them to understand what we're giving you is more choice, greater competition.  We're incentivizing more people to be part of the process, and we're going to be driving down the cost of those premiums.
You had a second.
Q    My second question on communications has to do with the President's assertion about the wiretapping.  Because the White House wants this now to be handled by the legislative branch, and in confidence and in classification, can we count on the President to, himself, while this investigation is going on, to cease and desist using Twitter or any other public venue to make accusations that are in public but he will not respond to in public?
MR. SPICER:  With respect to this particular situation?  I'll ask that and I'll get back to you on that.
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Just getting back to the question about if one likes his or her healthcare, they can keep it.  In 2013, Congressman Fred Upton, then Chairman of the House Energy Committee, offered legislation that put precisely those words into law and it received the votes of every Republican member in the House and between 40 and 50 Democrats, and then it died in the Senate.  Would the administration support a revival of the Upton Amendment?  In other words, putting the right to keep one's healthcare plan and doctor if he or she liked it, today?
MR. SPICER:  I mean, I think that's the goal.  I don't want to start talking about what we're going to -- as we go through the process.  We've now put our stamp on this and sent it to the House.  It will work its will as amendments come up through regular order.  Our team will weigh in on those with their staff and, again, the President is meeting with the Whip Team today.
I don't want to start saying we're going to support this amendment or that amendment now, but I think generally speaking, obviously the goal is to make sure that people get a plan that they like that's affordable, that meets what they need to have met, that they shouldn't have to have a one-size-fits-all, government-instilled healthcare system that doesn't offer any choice or, frankly, isn't tailored to the needs that they have.  I think that's an important thing.
John.
Q    Sean, right now you're two votes short of passing repeal-and-replace in the Senate because you've got four Republican senators who are saying they can't support the bill because of rolling back the Medicaid expansion.  What do you say to those senators who are very concerned that people will lose coverage that this does not provide enough stability for those people who rely on Medicaid for their healthcare?
MR. SPICER:  Well, there's two things, John.  One is, we're at day one.  We're going to go through the House first, so we've got a little bit of time.  And I think as we go through that process, these senators -- and not just the additional two but I think and hope that we'll get additional ones -- they recognize that those people, as I've said over and over again here -- if we do nothing, they're going to be in a very, very worse scenario than they are now.
More and more people -- if you're on Medicaid, which serves so many low-income Americans, as I mentioned, they have a card.  And that card does not allow them to go to doctor after doctor who are saying, we're not going to take Medicaid or TRICARE anymore.  
So I would ask those senators, what are you doing to help us work on a bill that will get them insured again?  Because for too many Americans, they've got a card, but they don't have insurance.  And I think that's a very, very big thing to -- a distinction to make.
They're the ones who have the problem right now.  They've got a Medicaid card and nowhere to go.  And what we need to do is to make sure that low-income Americans, veterans, small business owners, individuals who desperately need healthcare have options and affordability.
Q    One other piece of this.  You could bring down the cost of the insurance itself through efficiencies in the system, selling across state lines.  But the biggest driver of the increase in health insurance cost is the skyrocketing cost of medicine.  What in this overall plan do you propose to do to either cap the rise or even bring it down?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think you -- the Secretary mentioned this, but I mean, the cost of prescription drugs is -- 
Q    That's one small -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, it's not.  It's a big factor.  I think that -- 
Q    But when you're paying $50,000 out of pocket to get a stent?  I mean, it's -- 
MR. SPICER:  Again, what is the biggest thing missing -- 
Q    -- but it's getting out of control.
MR. SPICER:  Fair enough, but -- 
Q    Fair enough, drugs is one part of it but -- huge other part of it.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, when you talk about procedures or drugs, the biggest thing that's missing in this whole equation is competition.  I mean, we're down to one plan in many places.  There's nothing for these places to compete -- 
Q    There’s plenty of competition between hospitals.
MR. SPICER:  No, there's -- I mean, that's fine, but if they know they're going to get the same reimbursement rate, if they know that there's no other options, that plans aren't trying to get people -- then that's a big difference.  Right now, there's a lack of competition in the industry.  
And I think one of the President's -- I get it may be one part of that, but you're right, that all-over medicine -- procedures and such -- there's a reason he met with drug executives and talked about getting those costs down; that there's a multi-faceted approach, and how do we instill competition, how do we drive down costs?  
But you're right, we've got to do more to get the cost of that down, of the procedures to allow additional options.  Everything that is -- it's the same way that, again -- think about your insurance.  One of the things that was driving up cost in the past was people were exercising the option of going to an emergency room over and over again for their primary care.  And what happened is that you saw all of these "clinics" pop up from around and insurance carriers actually made it cheaper in terms of co-pays to go see that than an emergency room, driving people to somewhere that didn't continue to drive up cost, clog insurance.  That competition alone starts saving the plans money and helping to keep cost down.  We've got to instill more aspects of competition in medicine.
Jennifer.
Q    Sean, can you give us an update on the effort to roll back regulations?  Have the taskforce -- regulatory reform taskforces identified any regulations to roll back?  And have any actually been repealed?
MR. SPICER:  I think that they have had their work cut out for them.  They’ve started as they -- the President has met with different industries and companies, corporations, associations.  That is a constant subject of discussion, which is those regulatory aspects of our economy that are keeping companies from growing, expanding and hiring.  And so I know that the domestic policy team and others have been working on that.  And if I can get further updates on specific legislation or, excuse me, specific regulatory action, I'll get back to you.
Hallie.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Two topics for you.  I'm trying to get some clarity on something that my colleagues have tried to follow up on as well.  You've said that the President stands by his tweets Saturday morning that President Obama ordered this wiretap.  You've also said that the administration wants Congress -- let me just be clear -- he found out this information.  You've also said that the President wants Congress to investigate.  Some members of Congress, by the way, have asked the White House and asked the President to come forward with that information.  So bottom line, why would the President want Congress to investigate for information he already has?
MR. SPICER:  I think there's a separation-of-powers aspect here as I mentioned to Jonathan that we think it's -- 
Q    Talk about resources and time -- why waste that?
MR. SPICER:  Well, it's not a question of waste it.  It's a question of appropriateness.  
Q    But if the President has the info, Sean -- and I guess that's what I'm trying to get to -- if he's sitting on this information that he found out, he's now directing or asking or recommending that the intelligence committees look into this.  And you talked about they have resources and staff, which they do, but why expend those resources and staff if the President found out this information and has it?
MR. SPICER:  I think there's a difference between directing the Department of Justice, which may be involved in an ongoing investigation, and asking Congress as a separate body to look into something and add credibility to the look -- adds an element that wouldn't necessarily be there if we were directing the Department of Justice, for example.  But again, I think we've made it very clear how he wants this done and where we go from there. 
Q    Second question then.  Millions of Americans are working on their tax returns right now.  Will the President commit to releasing his tax returns for this year and is he still under audit for his past returns?
MR. SPICER:  My understanding is he's still under audit and I'll follow up on the question.
Q    Question and quick follow-up.  How do you understand what we've seen on the growing number of cases at the Canadian border of Canadians born and raised in Canada with valid passports being stopped at the border and told just to go back?  They won't let them come in and -- in the U.S.
MR. SPICER:  I'm not aware of that.  I think that's something that probably should be addressed to the Department of Homeland Security.
Q    Do you think there might be a misunderstanding of the messages sent on the immigration --
MR. SPICER:  I don't know.  I think it's a good question that is probably best directed towards the Department of Homeland Security.  
Dr. Swan.
Q    Thank you.  Is the White House going to keep its promise to withdraw from the Paris climate agreement?  And our understanding is that there is some divisions of opinion -- Rex Tillerson wants to stay in; Steve Bannon wants to get out.  What’s going on?  Will you keep the promise?  If not, why not?
MR. SPICER:  I think that's something I'd be glad to follow up with you and everyone.  I don't have anything on that right now.  I'm aware of the discussion of it, so let me -- if I can, I'll get back to you
Mike.
Q    I have an unrelated question, but I also want to follow up on something --
MR. SPICER:  Unrelated questions are my favorite.  (Laughter.)
Q    You talked about the communications strategy.  Will the President play a public role in selling this bill?  Will he speak to the public about it?  Will he answer questions about it?
MR. SPICER:  That's a good question.  I think that we are going to have a very comprehensive strategy.  As I mentioned, just a few minutes from now the President is going to engage with members of the House Whip Team to talk to them.  
Q    -- talking to members of Congress.    
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, but -- and I understand that.  This is step one.  There’s a lot of time -- as I mentioned, we expect to be dealing with this for the next several weeks.  There will be plenty of opportunities for the President to speak about that, to engage with the public.  But it's going to be a comprehensive plan that we will discuss.
We had I can't even begin to tell you how many administration folks, members of Congress flooding the broadcast and radio airwaves today, both nationally and in local markets.  We were very, very active throughout the country getting out the word on what we're doing and why we're doing it, from national broadcast shows to cable to -- I mean, to radio.  We had a very, very aggressive start to this effort.  We're working with the House, in particular.  We’re continuing to start really engaging with the Senate.  
But this is going to be a comprehensive effort, working with the House and the Senate, to get this thing done, and other partners -- doctors and outside groups that share this concern.  As I mentioned earlier to one of the other folks, there’s a need by companies and corporations who are feeling the weight of additional cost to join us in this effort.  And I just want -- this is obviously something that needs to get dealt with.  The escalating costs are having a significant impact not just on our economy, but on the ability of people to get hired, or, frankly, people who are hired leave their job because the cost of healthcare is not allowing especially people in the small- and medium-sized businesses to keep up with those costs.
With that, thank you guys very much.  I look forward to seeing you --
Q    -- meeting tomorrow -- congressmen coming to the meeting with the President.
MR. SPICER:  We'll have a readout --
Q    Sean, I have that unrelated question, which was --
MR. SPICER:  I’m sorry.  That's not fair.  Mike gets his unrelated question.
Q    And answer mine after that, please.
Q    Will the Trump administration continue the Obama administration’s practice of releasing publicly the visitor logs?
MR. SPICER:  We're currently evaluating our procedures on that and we'll have some -- and when we have an announcement I'll let you know.
And, April, I'll have a readout on our schedule for tomorrow later.  
Q    He’s meeting tomorrow with --
MR. SPICER:  Once it's confirmed, I will let you know first, and then everybody else.  
Thank you, guys.  Have a great day.
END
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
1:37 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Good morning.  First off, I want to acknowledge, as the President did this morning, that today is International Women’s Day.  It's also Women’s History Month.  We're going to be holding several events throughout the month here at the White House to honor and celebrate women and how their vital contributions have and continue to be to our society, our economy, our family and our businesses.
The President tweeted this morning about the surge in hiring in the two months that he’s been in office.  LinkedIn’s workforce reports say January and February were the strongest consecutive months for hiring in over a year and a half.  A new report from ADP and Moody’s showed strong private job growth that is far exceeding market expectations.  And just this morning, Samsung confirmed that it’s planning a “major investment” in U.S. production facilities, directly citing the President’s election as an influence in their decision.  The initial investment is expected to reach around $300 million.
We keep seeing that the wave of optimism in growth in the wake of the President’s pledges to help American businesses continues to produce real results for people throughout our nation.
Yesterday I forgot to -- there are a couple of things that I didn’t get to yesterday, so let me mention a couple of those.  Yesterday afternoon, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Dr. David Shulkin, and senior White House staff met with several veteran service organizations -- included in what is commonly referred to as the Big Six -- to discuss the President’s commitment to helping our veterans and modernizing our VA.  The meeting represented another step in fulfilling the President’s promise to the men and women who have served our nation so honorably.  I know the President looks forward to personally following up on that meeting with the VSOs.
Also last night, the President named several individuals whom he intends to nominate or appoint to key administration posts:  Courtney Simmons Elwood, General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency; Noel Francisco, Solicitor General at the Department of Justice; Jeffrey Rosen, Deputy Secretary of Transportation; John J. Sullivan, General Counsel for the Department of Defense; Ajit Pai, member of the Federal Communications Commission; and Tony Sayegh, Jr., the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs at the Department of Treasury.
Expect further announcements as the week goes on.
Now, on to the events of the day.  This morning, after receiving his daily intelligence briefing, the President met with Laurene Powell Jobs, the founder and president of Emerson Collective, an organization dedicated to removing the barriers that unfortunately prevent some in the world from achieving their full potential.  They discussed education and immigration policy, which are two of the areas that Emerson Collective focuses on.
Then the President held a strategic affairs lunch, focused on infrastructure with leaders in the private sector.  Infrastructure used to be a point of American pride.  But now, an overbearing, ineffective regular system can keep projects in limbo for years.  The President has already started removing the regulatory roadblocks that have been killing projects before they’ve even begun through his executive actions, streamlining the permitting process and calling for each agency throughout the government to identify regulations that cause undue burden.
As the President has said many times, strong public-private partnerships will also be key to revitalizing our country’s ruined roads, crumbling bridges and outdated airports.  The government has wasted too much of the taxpayers’ money on inefficient and misguided projects.  By looking at infrastructure from a businessperson’s perspective, as the President and these executives do, we can restore respect for the taxpayer dollar and make the best investment.
The President was particularly pleased to be holding this meeting now that Secretary of Transportation Chao, EPA Administrator Pruitt, and Energy Secretary Perry are all confirmed and getting to work.  In attendance at the lunch, as I mentioned, were Secretary Chao, Secretary Perry, Administrator Pruitt, and then Richard LeFrak, CEO of LeFrak; Steve Roth, the CEO of Vornado Realty Trust; Josh Harris, co-founder of Apollo Global Management; Bill Ford, the CEO of General Atlantic; Lynn Scarlett, the managing director of the Nature Conservancy; Tyler Duvall, the partner of McKinsey; and Elon Musk of SpaceX.
Later this afternoon, the President will meet with Congressman Elijah Cummings to discuss rising prescription drugs prices.  I know the President is looking forward to continuing the dialogue that they started a few weeks ago on the phone.  
At 4:00 o’clock, the President will meet with Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, Senator Murkowski, and Senator Sullivan of Alaska.  They’re expected to discuss the priorities of the Department of Interior, especially as it pertains to the government-owned lands in Alaska.  
This evening, the President will meet with conservative leaders about health care.  We'll have more details and participants on that meeting a little bit later this afternoon.
The President and the Vice President continue to reiterate their support for the House bill on Obamacare repeal and replace, and look forward to working with Congress to institute a new healthcare system.  Tonight, the President will have dinner with Senator and Mrs. Cruz.
And finally, a couple of additional administration announcements.  Today, the President and the First Lady announced the initial details for the 139th White House Easter Egg Roll taking place on Monday, April 17th.  They are honored to continue the traditions of the past while creating new ones that will play a lasting role in the fabric of our nation's history.  Tickets to the Easter Egg Roll are free to the public and will be allotted through an online lottery.  Further details on the lottery and information on that day will be released later this month.  Keep an eye on WhiteHouse.gov for updates on that.
I'm also pleased to announce -- and a little bit proud -- that Taoiseach Kenny of Ireland will be visiting the White House for the traditional St. Patrick's Day visit on March 16th.  We'll have further details on that visit, as well as the other foreign leader visits later this week.
With that, some questions.
David Smith of The Guardian.
Q    Hi, Sean.  Can I ask about the President's state visit to the UK?  Is there timing for that?  And what was your reaction to some members of Parliament in Britain saying the President is not welcome?  They actually used words like "racist" and "sexist."  Has that led him to reconsider?
MR. SPICER:  The President, as you know, accepted Her Majesty's invitation when the Prime Minister was here.  He looks forward to going over and visiting the United Kingdom.  As we have details to share with you further, we will, but there is nothing further at this time.
Caitlin.
Q    Does the White House have a reaction to the Iranian vessels coming within 150 yards of a Navy ship over the weekend?  Aren't they on notice?  And will you offer anything beyond a verbal reaction?  And then I have a follow-up question.
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  The USNS ship that was in close proximity is obviously something that the President has been made aware of.  The President has been very clear that this provocative action is something that won't be tolerated.  With that, I would refer you to the Department of Defense, who is monitoring that situation and will talk about the appropriate actions they may take. 
And your next one?
Q    And then, secondly, does he have any plans to revamp the H-1B visa program by the April 1 deadline?
MR. SPICER:  I think we've talked before about immigration as a whole.  I think there is the legal part of immigration and then the illegal part of immigration.  The President's actions that he's taken in terms of his executive order and other revamping of immigration policy have focused on our border security, keeping our country safe, our people safe.  And then, obviously, whether it's H-1B visas or the other one -- spousal visas -- other areas of student visas, I think there is a natural desire to have a full look at -- a comprehensive look at that.  He discussed the RAYS Act yesterday with Senators Perdue and Cotton.  We'll have more on that coming forward.
But I think as the readout mentioned, he was very supportive of their efforts with respect to how we view legal immigration.  He mentioned it in his joint address that we're one of only a handful of countries that doesn't use a merit-based system of immigration, and that is something that we need to look at in its totality.
Hunter.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  I had two quick questions.  Are you aware of any women who work at the White House who are participating in the strikes today?  And also, more generally, what is the administration’s reaction to this protest?  And do you think it’s an effective way -- skipping work is an effective way for women to demonstrate their power and significance? 
MR. SPICER:  On the first part, I am not aware of any that are not here.  I think everyone that I’m aware of has shown up and is working really hard to advance the President’s agenda.  They’re committed to moving this country forward.  For those of us who have joined the President throughout government, I think -- but obviously, as the President stated today, we want to recognize the contributions that women make to our businesses, to our families, to our economy, to our society.  
And it’s a free country.  People have the right to express themselves.  But I think that we should, on a daily basis -- not just one day a year but 365 days a year -- appreciate the contributions that women make in all of those categories.  So it shouldn’t be a daily thing, and hopefully we can help fix that a little bit more.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  There seems to be this groundswell of conservative opposition to the healthcare bill that was offered up by leadership in the House of Representatives.  You mentioned the President is going to be meeting this evening with conservatives.  What is his message to those individuals?  Are they members of the Freedom Caucus?  Will Senator Rand Paul be there?  And can you give a sense about what the President intends to do to turn around that opposition that was quite apparent yesterday?
MR. SPICER:  So a few things on that.  One, as I mentioned, we’ll have a list of participants later.  Two, I think that there has been a lot of -- from business and conservative groups have been very supportive of this, whether it’s Americans for Tax Reform, Americans’ Taxpayers Union, the Medical Device Manufacturing Association, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, AdvaMed, One Nation Health, Consumer Health Products Association, the Association of -- AMAC, the National Association of Wholesale Distributors, the American Legislative Exchange Council, and others.
There’s been tremendous support for this.  We’ve had people throughout Washington, D.C going to different associations and groups throughout the day the last couple days talking about the benefits of this.  And we’re going to continue to do outreach.  He met, as you know, yesterday with the House Whip team expressing his unwavering support for the bill and the process that it’s about to encounter.  He’ll mention -- he’ll work with these individuals tonight.
And we’re going to have a full-court press.  Our team throughout the administration on local radio and local television to get that message right to the American people to talk about both the things that we talked about yesterday -- why we have a crisis right now in healthcare and why Obamacare is failing, but then secondly why the solution that the President has worked on with the House is the right one to bring down costs and to reinstitute choice.  So that message is going to continue to get delivered both today and for the next several weeks until it passes the House and the Senate and comes back to his desk.  
But again, one of the important messages that I think those on the conservative side need to understand is, right now, there is an uneven playing field.  If you get your insurance through Medicaid, Medicare, through the government, or an employer-based healthcare, you are untaxed, your employer is untaxed.  It is those self-employed individuals, those small businesses that are paying the penalty for this.
And that’s what I think we have to remember, is that we talk so often on the conservative side and on the Republican side about the importance of entrepreneurship, the importance of small businesses to our economy, and yet they’re the ones who suffer right now with an inequity in the tax system.  And I think that by leveling that playing field, and by giving them more options and driving down cost, we’re actually doing a very conservative thing here by removing the mandate of a government-mandated “you must buy this program or you will pay a penalty,” and eliminating choice.
We are enacting I think very strong conservative values in healthcare that give all Americans more choice at a lower cost.  So I think that should be a very positive message.  
John.
Q    Yes, thank you.  As a brand new federal employee I'm sure you're aware  --
MR. SPICER:  A current -- welcome back.
Q    Yes, well, at the moment.  I’m sure you and your family are aware that Office of Personnel Management offers a very comprehensive healthcare program called the Federal Employee Health Benefit Program.
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    You, anyone in this building, on the Hill, their staff, their family, their friends -- not their friends, their family -- well, maybe who knows -- very generous.  It’s state of the art.  The individuals involved in the healthcare situation right now, the debate, no matter how it plays out, can they really have the kind of sympathy and empathy for individuals who may not benefit nearly as much when they’re negotiating this -- all these plans, Sean?
MR. SPICER:  In what respect?
Q    Well, I mean, you’re fine.  You’re covered.
MR. SPICER:  Sure, but it’s unfortunate -- first of all, I’m not fine.  Because I think because of Obamacare, premiums on everybody have gone up.  Regardless of what you pay, federal employees make a contribution to their healthcare plan as well.  And I think that the -- all premiums have increased over the last -- whether you’re in an employer-based system or not.  
So one of the big issues with Obamacare was in order to fix a problem that faced 15 to 20 million people, is that the entire system got shattered, and prices on everybody got ratcheted up.  People who were on Medicaid suddenly lost their ability -- so the issue was, is that in an attempt to solve a problem that affected a very specified and defined group of people, we affected the entire healthcare market.
So whether or not you get it from an employee or not -- an employer or not -- but to your question, that’s part of the issue.  
Q    But --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, hold on.  Here’s the issue -- you’re right, you’re absolutely right.  Right now, if you’re a federal employee, and a lot of cases in state, you get to open a book and you get to look at what plan matters to you, what plan is best for you or your family -- how much do you want to pay, how much coverage do you want to have, what’s the co-pay you’re willing to -- what services or benefits do you want as part of your plan.  Absolutely.  But the issue is, for so many Americans, they don’t have that choice.  For a third of the counties in this country, they’ve got one choice, one.  And in a lot of states they’ve got none, or the exchanges are becoming fewer and fewer, the number of doctors and plans that take Medicaid, fewer and fewer.
So to your point, I think actually we’re in a unique place, because we get to understand what the average American should get -- that we shouldn’t be limited to a specified number of people.
Q    I appreciate your argument.  Very well taken.  
MR. SPICER:  Thank you. 
Q    However, I’m going to compare a GS-5 or a GS-9 to a senator or a secretary of one of the agencies.  I mean the safety net on those individuals gives them a certain cushion, then they're negotiating.  But do they really have that kind of compassion or that kind of empathy for the people who, in fact, may be thrown off the healthcare?
MR. SPICER:  I think that just because somebody has healthcare doesn't mean that they can't empathize with somebody who doesn't.  
We all have family and friends that are suffering.  I mean, that's like saying because I have a job I can't be empathetic to somebody who doesn't have a job.  We all have family or friends.  It’s the same thing when we watch a friend or a family member suffer through a terminal disease, because we have suffered through it doesn't mean that we can't have compassion towards that person or be concerned on how much that bill is costing them.  I mean, that's actually in some ways -- depending on the relationship you have with that person -- you can even feel worse.  You can feel guilty about how much you have and how you're not able to help that person.  I think in many cases that's what drives us is to know that there are options available to some Americans and not others.  
Q    I appreciate your response.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you. 
John.
Q    Sean, will you confirm that there is a criminal investigation into this alleged theft of cyber tools from the CIA by WikiLeaks?  What can the White House tell us about the situation, particularly the fact that it seems like there’s another leak for the intelligence community that's on the scale of Edward Snowden?  And can you assure the American people that none of these tools have ever been used against them?
MR. SPICER:  Well, there’s a couple things in that.  Number one, for obvious reasons it is our policy as a government not to confirm the authenticity of any kind of disclosure or hack.  That would be highly inappropriate for us. 
But all of these occurred under the last administration -- that is important.  All of these alleged issues.  And I think it’s interesting to have it asked this way about the damage that could have occurred or what tools could be used in light of what’s been going on recently.  
We've had your own network’s correspondent James Rosen had his phones -- multiple phones tapped.  Was that appropriate back then?
I think there’s a lot of concern out there about alleged leaks.  There’s two steps to this.  And I think what you saw over the last week in terms of -- this should be a major concern to people in terms of the leaks that are coming out and the desire to get to the bottom of them -- whether or not -- not specifically with respect to the disclosure that you're referring to, but I think the idea that we are having these ongoing disclosures of national security and classified information should be something that everybody is outraged by in this country.  This is the kind of disclosure that undermines our country, our security, and our well-being.
And you've seen over the last two years, depending on the leak, it depends on the outrage.  It’s interesting how whenever -- whether the leak occurred under the last administration, you had member after member talking about disclosures that occurred during that last administration, whether it was members of Congress -- Elijah Cummings expressed concern during the last thing -- last administration in terms of the Americans that were -- when it dealt with Hillary Clinton, there was complete outrage about the leaks that occurred; members calling for investigations to the leaks.  It’s interesting how there is sort of a double standard with when the leaks occur, how much outrage there is.
And so I do think it’s important.  While I don't want to get into confirming or denying this particular thing, I think it is interesting how different subjects are approached. 
This one everyone is immediately rushing to, and there should be a lot more coverage of this.  This alleged leak should concern every single American in terms of the impact it has on our national security. 
Q    Can I ask something unrelated?
MR. SPICER:  Of course, you can.
Q    Robin Shahini has been imprisoned in Iran since last October for collaborating with a hostile government -- that government being the United States of America.  He's on a hunger strike, apparently his health is suffering.  Is the President aware of Mr. Shahini's plight and that of three other Americans who are being held in Iran?  And what, if anything, might the President be doing about it?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, so obviously we're aware of the situation.  In that particular case, I would refer you to the State Department.  
Q    I wanted to go back to an earlier question.  What is the President personally going to be doing in order to sell this healthcare bill?  And what's he going to do to convince reticent lawmakers to come along -- people like Rand Paul, who don't like it?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean, we're on day two.  As I mentioned, we've been out and local -- talk radio and local markets.  The President yesterday met with the House deputy whips.  Today, he's having a series of additional meetings with conservative groups, with others.  He's already talked to insurance agents.  I mean, we've talked about the lead up to this with the insurance executives, with companies, with various members of the House and the Senate from both parties.  He met with governors, attorneys general, I think there's a group of lieutenant governors coming in.  
We're going to be aggressively going after -- talking about the solution that we have for healthcare, both the need to repeal the current Obamacare system and the need to replace it with something that gives patients the choices and costs that they need.  As I mentioned yesterday, and I can't overstate this, there's a difference between having a card and having care.  Being told you have coverage and not being able to use it is no good, and that's the thing that I think is really important.  
When we get asked the question, so often, how many people are going to be covered, that's not the question that should be asked -- how many people are going to get the care they need?  Having coverage with a high deductible and, in some cases -- or not having a plan that allows you to get the coverage you need or afford it, isn't real coverage.  It's a card.  And I think that's the big difference in the approach that we're taking here.  It's how do we get people the affordable care they need; that there's more choice; that more doctors are coming into the system instead of leaving.  And that is a big, big difference in the approach that's happening now.
Q    Will he be going on the road to try to sell it?
MR. SPICER:  I think you will see a lot of travel and a lot of activity by the President and all of the administration.  And it's not just going to be the President.  It's going to be the secretary, the directors, key administration staff.  The Vice President has been actively engaged in meeting on the Hill, on talk radio, on local radio, on local television.  You've seen a flurry of meetings with outside interests, with op-eds explaining the problem and engaging groups and associations that have an interest in this, and industry leaders.
But this is going to be a very, very aggressive, comprehensive approach to making sure that every American understands that there is a major problem and that we are here to fix it.
Cecilia.
Q    Just on WikiLeaks, I want to go back to that -- two parts.  Is the President outraged by this?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean, again, I don't want to -- the allegations -- he has been very clear about the concern that he has for leaks.  This is -- 
Q    This one specifically -- 
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, Cecilia, if I -- I think he is very concerned about the allegations that are out there in terms of what may or may not happen.  It is an allegation, it is something that we are not going to confirm at this time.  But as you can imagine from the President's previous comments, he is extremely concerned about this, about these allegations, about this -- about the potential that something -- if this were true -- would have on our national security.  
And make no mistake about it, I think the President has talked before that anybody who leaks classified information will be held to the highest degree of law.  We will go after people who leak classified information.  We will prosecute them to the full extent of the law.  Playing with our nation's national security is not something that should be taken lightly under this administration.
Q    Quick follow-up.  When it came to the campaign and Hillary Clinton, the President said, "I love WikiLeaks."  Does he still feel that way today?
MR. SPICER:  There is a big difference between disclosing Podesta -- John Podesta's gmail accounts about a back and forth, and his undermining of Hillary Clinton, and his thoughts on her on a personal nature, and the leaking of classified information.  There is a massive, massive difference between those two things.  And I think it is, again, the interest and the outrage that occurred last year by a lot of Democrats when it came to leaks is interesting that we're hearing not as much outrage now when it comes to some of our issues of national security.
April.
Q    Sean, a couple questions.  One, you said Congressman Cummings -- you affirmed Congressman Cummings is meeting with President Trump today.
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    In the last press conference, his solo press conference the President had, he talked about Senator Schumer telling Elijah Cummings not to come.  What happened to smooth this over?  And what is the conversation going to be about?  Is it just going to solely be on the high cost of prescription drugs?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that the nature of the meeting stems from the conversation they had on the phone, which was on prescription drugs.  And then I’m sure that if Congressman Cummings or the President brings up another subject, it will go there.  I’m not -- we’ll try to have some sort of readout afterwards, depending on how that goes.
But the nature of it is an area where they agree.  And if you remember, one of the things that they talked about on the phone was that there were probably several more areas that they would agree on, and find that they would agree on, throughout a conversation.  And I hope that that conversation does exactly what they said that it would in terms of getting to those areas of common agreement where they can work together to help solve additional problems that our country faces.
Q    So you don't have any knowledge of what happened to smooth that over for him to come in --
MR. SPICER:  I know our teams were in touch with -- his office immediately followed.  And as you know, there were a couple times when the meetings had been -- tried to be scheduled and just didn't work out.  And luckily, he was able to --
Q    He’s one member of the 49 of the CBC.  Right after that press conference, the White House reached out to the Congressional Black Caucus, to Cedric Richmond, the head of the caucus.  Where is that meeting?  Where does that meeting land?  Is it happening?
MR. SPICER:  I know that we've reached out, and we're looking for a date on that, as well.  So we're pleased that this one was able to come together, and then we’ll get to the next one.
Q    My last question. 
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    Yesterday there was a compare-and-contrast with visuals, show and tell if you will -- 
MR. SPICER:  Yes, I saw that --
Q    Yes, you were -- yes.  And you compared and contrasted about how you're going about it and how the Obama administration went about Obamacare.  One difference that they've made note of -- and I want to get your response to this -- is the fact that you may have this and said that you're doing this versus what they're doing -- the one thing they say that you did not do that they did:  had their bill scored by CBO.  And you did not score it by CBO.
MR. SPICER:  Sure.  It is being scored.  Look, I know -- look, with all due respect to them, this the same group that said -- who passed it and then told us we could read it. 
This bill is online for every American to go to ReadTheBill.gop.  It’s on the Speaker’s website.  We link to it on several accounts that we've tweeted.
Q    But it was scored before they went before the Congress.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And again, if that's the complaint, this is the same group that didn't let anybody read it, that jammed it through with no bipartisan support.  This President has reached out to both sides of the aisle, had governors here, had senators here to get their input.  There is no contrast between what we did and what they did.  This was a full effort to reach out to the members in the House and the Senate.  It’s going through regular order in the House.  Every member of the House and the Senate will be able to have their opportunity to have amendments offered through -- well, through the committee process and on the floor.
So the idea that they can compare the date that they got it scored is pretty reaching deep on this because there has been an opportunity for members to have their input on this and to talk about their concerns, to give their input on it -- especially the governors, who were left on the sideline last time and who have such an important role in administering healthcare when it comes to Medicaid.  
The idea that anyone talks about when the score was issued -- there will be a score in all good time.  But the other thing is, let’s be honest, the irony of the score is that the CBO was way off the last time.  I don't think that we're waiting to -- that that's a big issue to us right now.
Q    Doesn't cost matter, though, before you -- 
MR. SPICER:  Of course, cost matters.  But look at how off they were last time.  If you're looking at the CBO for accuracy, you're looking in the wrong place.  They were way, way off last time in every aspect of how they scored and projected Obamacare in terms of --  
Q    But you have no numbers -- 
MR. SPICER:  But neither did they.  Last time, if you look at the number of people that they projected would be on Obamacare, they are off by millions.  So the idea that we're waiting for a score -- it will be scored.  But the idea that that's any kind of authority based on the track record that occurred last time is a little far-fetched.
Jessica.
Q    Two questions on the wall, Sean.  As you know, the bids for prototypes went out today.  And I just was curious about the timing of that, how much pressure there was to get that going quickly.  And then secondly, is there guidance from the White House about what kinds of vendors can build the wall, especially can international vendors build the wall?
MR. SPICER:  I think that process is working through -- as the President has talked about before, we were trying to move ahead with existing funds that DHS has.  And then we’ll continue to create a timeline to ask Congress for that funding.  We're working with Congress on that.
And then I don't think it will be any surprise to know that the President is going to favor American workers and American companies when it comes to an American project.  That shouldn’t be any kind of surprise.
Blake.
Q    Sean, it’s looking increasing likely that the Federal Reserve next week will hike interest rates.  Two brief questions.  One, how does the President feel about that?  And secondly, does he have the full confidence in Janet Yellen, who he described during the campaign as “too political” to lead the Federal Reserve and set monetary policy?
MR. SPICER:  Let me get back to you on that one.  I don't have any comment on the Federal Reserve.  I’ll look at the team.  What I will say is that, as I mentioned at the outset, when you look at the hiring and the jobs and the manufacturing and the pace, the consumer confidence and the CEO indexes that are going -- that have already come out in the first two months, we see a resurgence, an optimism in the economy by job creators to want to hire here, who want to manufacture here, who want to grow here.  
And I think that our economy is clearly on the upswing.  And I think you see statement after statement, company after company coming out and sharing in the President’s vision for moving the country forward and for renewing the optimism and building and being part of an American resurgence in terms of our economy. 
Q    Just to be clear, the no comment was on Mrs. Yellen or on this thoughts of a rate hike?
MR. SPICER:  I’ll get back to you on both.  How is that?
Yeah, go ahead.
Q    Sean, along with April’s last question about the difference between this administration and the previous one and how to approach this issue, one thing that the Obama administration did do was get key stakeholders at the table -- AARP, American Medical Association.  Both of those organizations have come out today strongly opposed to this proposal.  What’s your message, particularly with respect to the AARP?
MR. SPICER:  Well, they got a really good deal last time when it came to prescription drugs in particular.  I think -- this is a patient-centric bill.  It’s about patients.  It’s about people.  It’s about the Americans who were left behind.  Look at what those deals got people last time.  I mean, for all those people that are on Medicaid, in particular, they don't have choices anymore.  So I would argue that the President has put the American people first and has put patients first.  
So you can talk about -- we're glad to have support, make no mistake about it.  But I think that the support that this administration and I think the House is focused on is getting every American their buy-in and their support.  Obviously, look, I’m not going to -- we would love to have every group on board.  But this isn’t going to be -- every single deal we heard about it getting through, “the Cornhusker Kickback,” this and that.  Over and over again, it was one deal after another to get to -- to buy votes to get it through the Senate. 
So if you want line up how many special interests got paid off last time versus now, they’ll probably win hands down.
Q    Sean -- 
MR. SPICER:  This isn’t -- hold on -- but this isn’t about trying to figure out how many special interests in Washington we can get paid off.  It’s about making sure that patients get the best deal that lowers prices and brings back costs.
But again, I think -- what I’m trying to figure out is at some point you're defending the indefensible.  Nancy Pelosi put out three criteria for how they judge Obamacare.  And by their own standards, they fail on all three.  Costs are up.  Choices are down.  There is no other way to judge that.  By every account, every single premium by every standard is up.  Choices are down across the country.  So there is a horrible deal that the American people got bought -- got sold.  And what we're trying to do is put patients back first in line.  
Q    But so the AARP is specifically talking about patients in their 50s and 60s.  The AARP describes this as an “age tax” that will disproportionately affect people who right now are low-income, are benefitting from subsidies under Obamacare and could stand -- according to the AARP’s estimate -- to take a hit of thousands of dollars in their premium payments this year when the subsidies go away and the tax credits go away.  What’s your message to those people who voted for the President?
MR. SPICER:  I think that -- right.  And the message from the President is that we want you to get more choice and a lower cost.  And I think that, as we work this bill through, through daylight -- not jam it through in the middle of the night -- that they are going to see as more and more people will that this is a deal for the American people that's going to put patients first, lower their costs, and give them more choices.
But again, I don't -- there is probably not a person out there, either through themselves or a loved one or a friend or a colleague that has seen choices go down and premiums go up [sic].  So what people are dealing with now is not acceptable.  And I think the idea that anyone defending the current status quo -- and even in some of the statements of some of the groups, they admit that there’s a problem right now.
And so my advice to those people is, join the process.  Share your idea, share your thought, let the process work its will so that it is a bill that has input.  But the bill  -- the way it was done last time is not something that’s acceptable.
Shannon.
Q    Is the President worried, though, that every major doctors group -- the American Medical Association, the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American College of Physicians -- have all come out and said they have serious concerns?  For all the talk of doctors and patients and choice, the doctors groups are all so far unanimously coming and saying they’re not supportive of this.  Is that concerning to the President?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think when you look at a lot of doctors versus the associations here in Washington, we have had tremendous input from doctors themselves.  Dr. Price, himself a doctor, is the one who crafted this.
So you have a doctor in charge of the administration’s effort to work with Congress.  You’ve got several physicians and other medical professionals in Congress that are talking about the experiences they have -- in fact, many of them ran for Congress because of the concerns they saw in their own industry.
So while I have respect for some of the work that some of these Washington, D.C.-based associations do, at the end of the day this is about patients and about the input from doctors who are on the front line of seeing patients and talking about the care that they’re able to give or not to give to people.
Anita.  
Q    Do you mind if I follow up on something else you said?
MR. SPICER:  I do -- I don’t, sorry.  
Q    You’ve talked about people having a card.  You’ve got a card, but it’s a $2,000 deductible and there’s only 10 doctors in your town that will see you, let’s say.  But that’s better than nothing if you get cancer or hit by a car.  So maybe this makes access -- right, but it is better than no insurance.  So if this expands access to people and choice, but it reduces the number of people who actually have health insurance --
MR. SPICER:  But I don’t think --
Q    -- so can it do both?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, of course it can.  And it will do both, by ensuring that more people -- right now you’ve got more people paying the penalty and saying, I don’t want healthcare, I’m going to pay the penalty because costs are too high.  And was it probably five, six, seven years ago, before Obamacare went into place, a single individual, young individual person on the open market could get a premium -- a plan with a premium of 100, 150 bucks a month.  It’s in the high 300s now.
And I think that there’s a big difference.  You’re not -- for young people just entering the workplace, for example, your example -- they go get into an accident, right now you’ve got a lot of individuals that get off their parents’ healthcare and say, I’m healthy, I have no desire to go get healthcare, it’s another few hundred dollars a month that I don’t have or that I’d rather spend on something else.
If we can get that cost down, it makes a lot more sense -- and get them plans that are tailored to them, 27-, 28-year-old individuals don’t need care that’s for folks -- that talks about certain things that -- a plan that has certain things that are towards the end of life.  But right now, you’ve got one-size-fits-all, government-run, government-mandated plans that offer people a suite of medical services that they do not need, because there’s no choice, and it’s a government-mandated system.
I think offering more choice and more competition allows people to pick a plan that is more tailored to your needs.  And this goes back a second ago to what John was asking, that if you can actually pick a plan and across state lines find one that suits you as an individual -- as opposed to maybe there’s a family plan that’s more comprehensive, it has dental and vision and all the things that your kids are going to need because of all the things you anticipate -- that’s a plan that a young family might need versus an older person that’s single or a young person that’s just entering the workforce.
But right now there’s no competition, there’s no choice.  So it’s not an either/or situation.  We’re facing a situation where more and more people are getting less and less and paying more and more for it, and that’s the wrong way to go.  
Mara.
Q    Anita.  You actually -- Anita.
MR. SPICER:  My apologies.  Anita, then Mara.  
Q    Switching gears completely, the military have recently conducted some kind of exercise at the naval base at Guantanamo Bay, and it was preparing for a migrant crisis.  And there is a DHS migrant center there.  And I wondered if the administration has considered, and what you all think about using that facility for immigrants.  Has that come up?
MR. SPICER:  That particular exercise, to the best of my knowledge, is a rather regular exercise that occurs, as do many of the exercises that the military prepares for on a whole host of contingency operations.  
So that is a routine military operation.
Q    Is there any consideration, though?
MR. SPICER:  It is a routine military operation, as several of them do with our partners throughout the world where we plan for random contingencies that may or may not happen.  That’s the job of the military -- to practice for contingencies that may or may not happen on a whole host of issues.
But to try to ascertain -- 
Q    Okay, so are you all considering using the facility for immigrants?
MR. SPICER:  There is nothing to consider it for.  I think we’re fine right now.  There is nothing that we would need to use it for.
But again, I mean, I think part of the goal of preparing the military going through various exercises is on a whole host of issues -- on refugees, they prepare for natural disasters.  We’re not anticipating a natural disaster, but we prepare for them.  At the White House, when we were coming in as an administration, I think we briefed during the transition period -- we did what’s called a right-seat, left-seat operation with the outgoing administration.  So we sat down and talked about cyberattacks and natural disasters, and the whole-of-government response in some of these things.
It doesn’t mean that we anticipate them, it doesn’t mean that we want them, it means that we’re going to prepare for them in the same way that many organizations do fire drills.  It’s not that you anticipate or expect a fire, but you prepare for them, as many families do.  Preparedness is the key to executing well, and I think that’s what all we’re doing.
Q    And secondarily, the Louisville media is reporting that President Trump will be there on Saturday.  Can you confirm that?  And is this about healthcare?  As you just said, he was going to make the rounds.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I’ve seen that report.  We have nothing to announce with respect to the President’s schedule at this time.  But, as I mentioned earlier to I think it was Shannon, that we will have -- or is it Jill, I can’t -- somewhere in this area -- we will have an update on the President’s schedule later this week.
But I do anticipate the President to be very active in his support for the repeal-and-replace effort.  And so this is what you should expect.
Now Mara.
Q    The CBO score is supposed to come out next week, and you just called into question their credibility.
MR. SPICER:  I didn’t call into question -- just so we’re clear, I’m just --
Q    It's true.
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Matt, I appreciate it, I can answer.  Their record is what I’m calling into question to -- when you look at the number of people and the costs on what they scored, the last Obamacare bill on, it’s way off.  That’s a fact, that’s not anything more than that.
Q    Well, people base their votes on what they think is going to happen to the cost and the coverage -- if they lose coverage.
MR. SPICER:  That’s right.
Q    Is there any analytic organization that you would accept a score from?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that there’s -- yeah, I mean OMB will probably put out a score on --
Q    If not the CBO, is there some organization -- so OMB is the -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, I’m not saying -- but, Mara, hold on.  All I’m saying is, look at what the CBO’s record is on Obamacare.  It’s vastly off.  I think they projected 20 million people to be on Obamacare this year; I believe the number is 12.  They’re way off in terms of the millions.
So it’s not a question of whether I’m questioning anything -- anyone that can actually do basic math can understand that their projections for Obamacare the last time were way, way off the mark.  And so my only point is, is that I think when they come out with this score, we need to understand the track record when it comes to healthcare.
Q    -- the track record?  Is there any scoring organization that you think has a good track record?
MR. SPICER:  There’s probably a lot.  And I think members have to look at a lot of things to cast their vote on.  They’re going to have to look at the totality of the bill, the support of their constituents, the current state of things.  I think that there’s no question -- look, when you look at the trajectory of the cost right now in terms of premiums, you can either say -- and not just the premiums, but Obamacare is going to collapse on its own weight very soon.  And the President made it very clear in his press conference and a lot of previous statements, the politically easy thing to do is just let it collapse and let Democrats come back to the table.
I don’t think that’s the right thing, and the President has made it clear he doesn’t think that’s the right thing.  This is an opportunity for him to show the American people that the right thing to do is to care about their healthcare options and the cost that they’re paying.
Q    And just one last thing.  He mentioned deductibles before and how they’re going up under Obamacare.  Are you promising people that their deductibles will come down under this plan?
MR. SPICER:  Everything that we have been led to believe about how this is -- yes, this will drive costs down.  When you talk about opening up pooling, when you talk about driving costs down because you can buy it over state lines, everything that has driven up costs, all of those market forces that will come in, and I think every leading economist that has looked at this says it will drive costs down.
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  The premier argument by Democrats, notably former President Obama today, is that enactment of the act that was illustrated yesterday would lead to many people losing their healthcare.  You certainly heard that from Democrats, but also several of the Republican governors who were here for the National Governors Association, including strong allies of the President -- Governor Bentley of Alabama, Governor Hutchinson of Arkansas voiced the same concern.  They did not want any plan that would lead to anyone losing their present healthcare.  What does the administration say to what is the leading argument against a new plan?  And then I have a follow-up question.
MR. SPICER:  Of course.  I would say that any governor that is concerned about people losing care right now should join us.  They are losing their care right now, they are losing their options, and they are paying too much.  So the answer is that, if you’re concerned about those principles, then you should be concerned with what is happening right now, and you should be concerned and want to join in this administration and work with this Congress.
And again, the big difference that’s here is, instead of us jamming a bill down Congress, and now allowing the American people to read it until it is passed, as was done with Obamacare with then-Speaker Pelosi, is that this bill is out in the open for every single person in the world to read.  It is open for people to let their member of Congress share their thoughts, share their ideas, and it’s done out in the open.
I think that is a vastly different approach with how this is going about than the last time, and that makes a big difference with the approach.  And it gives people an opportunity through the process, what they call regular order, to have input on this.  And if it can be made better, then great.
But I think this time, we recognized that there’s a lot of work that needs to get done on behalf of the patients that are having trouble getting care.
Alexis.
Q    Oh, wait.
MR. SPICER:  I’m sorry.
Q    My follow-up question is a follow-up question about the wall.  During the recent Governors Association meeting, Governor Graco Ramirez, who is the Chairman of Mexico’s Association of Federated Governors, warned that continued discussion about the wall and the President’s talk of building it might very well lead to the election of Mr. Lopez Obrador as the President of Mexico, and he is considered the most anti-American, most hostile-to-America of any of the candidates.  Are there any concerns that come up in the discussion of the wall, namely the impact on Mexican politics?
MR. SPICER:  No.  (Laughter.)  That was pretty good.  The President’s number-one concern is the safety of our country.  Number two is the jobs that are impacted by this and the ability of Americans to get the wage that they deserve.
But again, this is a national security issue, something that, frankly, when he’s discussed this with President Peña Nieto of Mexico, that -- there is a shared concern about drug cartels, drug trafficking, arms sales over the border.  There is a shared concern for the respect of the border, because it means a lot to both sides.
So this is something that we care about from a national security standpoint, and then obviously the President is concerned on it both -- as well as on an economic standpoint.
Alexis.
Q    I want to follow up on what John was just -- your answer was that if the healthcare bill could be made better, the President is interested in that.  So could I just clarify, when he meets with the congressional conservatives this evening who have misgivings about the legislation, is he intending to talk to them about what they would like to change, and is he open to making those changes?  Is that what he -- is that the mode he’s in, rather than a sell mode?  He’s in a listening mode?
MR. SPICER:  I think he’s in a -- very much of a sell mode.  The President and his team have worked very hard on this.  They’re very proud of the effort and the product that they have produced in consultation with the House and the Senate.
But obviously, it’s going through the process.  And so if somebody has an idea -- and that could be on the administration’s side -- that we believe that after a consultation with individuals or groups, that there’s a way to improve upon this -- but that’s the beauty of going through the process that we are.
But make no mistake, the President is very proud of the product that we have produced.  We are out in full sell mode all around the country talking about how we think this is the best way to solve the problem that the American people face, and why we believe that the solutions that we put forward in this bill are the right ones, and that will benefit them.
Go ahead.
Q    And can I follow up and say -- before the President meets with Chancellor Merkel next week, is it possible that we could see the President for a  more general multi-question news conference?  He’s been a little press-shy this week.  And from North Korea to healthcare selling to CIA leaks, we’d love to talk to him.  Could we see him for a news conference?
MR. SPICER:  I will ask, Alexis.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Would you ask him that?  (Laughter.)
MR. SPICER:  Is there anyone else?  I would be glad to ask -- show of hands.  (Laughter.)  Okay, thank you, I appreciate it.  I would be glad to ask the President, share your request with him, and I’ll see what we can do on his schedule.  But as you can -- he is very busy these days.  He has done a lot of sprays, he will continue to interact with you guys.  But I will be glad to make your request known.
Katie.
Q    Sean, yesterday Secretary Price said that the bill that you guys have introduced, both the repeal and the replace, are starting points.  And on Capitol Hill there was a lot of talk of the starting point being a nonstarter.  So it seems like there’s negotiations that need to be made.  Does the President have any non-negotiables in his bill that he will not take out, even at the request of conservatives?
MR. SPICER:  Well, Katie, I mean, I think, as I was just saying to Alexis, that it is a starting point.  It’s going through regular order in the House.  And so part of that process as it goes through the committee markup hearing, both in Ways and Means and House Energy and Commerce Committee -- that by its very nature allows for input through both of those committees and then ultimately on the floor before it moves over to the Senate, and the Senate goes through a similar process.
So I think, frankly, we’re just acknowledging the reality of where the process is.  But we’re proud of the process, we’re proud of the input that we’ve received from governors, from senators, from individuals, associations, companies.  And we feel very proud of the work that is encapsulated in this bill, and the results that it will yield.
And so that being said, I think the President understands, as a businessman, that if someone’s got a really good idea that he’s going to listen to it.  And if he can be part of the process to help make something better, there’s nothing that’s going to preclude that.  We have been very open to listening to people.  We’re very proud of that.  We’re going to go out, as I said, in full sell mode.  But if there’s an idea that comes across, we’re going to entertain that to make it clear.  
Hallie.
Q    Sean, two topics here.  First on healthcare, then I’ll have a follow-up on that.  In the past, you and others have accused Democrats of rushing through the original healthcare law.  Now, there are some Republicans, including today, who say this is simply moving too fast.  Is the President willing to accept a delayed timeline if it pushes repeal and replace into later in the year?
MR. SPICER:  Going through the process can’t be delayed -- I mean, by its very nature.  We’re going through the committee process.  There are two House committees --
Q    But you said the timeline is being -- maybe Easter break -- after that --
MR. SPICER:  But again, that’s subject -- right, but again, I would argue it’s subject to how the House does its will and then how the Senate does.  I think obviously we would like this to move forward.  There’s a lot of stuff in the queue.  We’ve talked about tax reform.  This bill is attached to the FY17 budget reconciliation, and I know that, for a lot of Americans, that means nothing in terms of the phrase and the nomenclature that surrounds how Congress does it.
But it’s important to recognize that that vehicle allows Congress to do certain things and not others with a 50-vote -- with a majority vote in the Senate.  That’s important.  There are certain things you can do through that, that you can’t do through other vehicles, and that will take a 60 vote and -- that you can do administratively.
So it’s actually -- if you heard Dr. Price talk yesterday about the three phases, it’s actually multi-phased, it’s going through regular order.  But there is simply no contrast between how we are approaching this and how Democrats approached it last time.
Number one, there’s actually been input from across the aisle, both from the governors who were here, attorneys general, outside groups, House and Senate Democrats have been able to provide input to both staff, to the senior administration officials and to the President.  And then secondly, it’s actually going through the process.  
So while we can predict a timeline, ultimately, it’s going to be up to the House and then the Senate to determine how fast it goes.  But there are members on each of those committees, and then, ultimately, every member on the floor that has the ability to give input.
Q    Just one other question.  I’m just curious about this meeting with Senator Cruz tonight.  He has come out and expressed some skepticism on the bill as it stands now.  Presumably that will be part of the topic of conversation, but as you mentioned, Heidi Cruz is coming too, and I’m wondering if the President has any plans to apologize to her for the insinuations he made on the campaign trail.  
MR. SPICER:  I think they’re looking forward to a great dinner.  He had dinner with the Rubios a couple of days ago, maybe a week ago.  He had lunch yesterday with Senator Graham.  As I stated weeks ago, the President is going to continue to have outreach to members of Congress of both parties.  He’s meeting with Congressman Cummings today.  
This is a President who wants to engage with members of both sides of the aisle in both Houses, but also groups, business leaders, union leaders, the AFL-CIO head, Richard Trumka, was here yesterday.  This is a President that’s going to engage with everybody that can help join in proposing ideas and thoughts and opinions on how to move the country forward.
So he looks forward to dinner tonight with Senator and Mrs. Cruz, as he has with several others.  And I think you’re going to see more -- a continuation of this kind of effort to reach out and get people’s ideas.  
Margaret.
Q    And then -- I apologize, I have a second topic, which is, does the President believe the CIA has been compromised in any way?  
MR. SPICER:  With respect to the disclosure, is that what you’re -- 
Q    yeah.
MR. SPICER:  Again, I’m not going to -- it’s U.S. government policy not to confirm this.  I think he has obviously been very concerned, as I stated, about the disclosure of national security on any level.  It undermines our country’s national security.  And I think that -- I just will say, I think there’s also been a big double standard when it comes to disclosures of classified information and the outrage that exists when one side has it happens versus another.
Q    What do you mean?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that there has been a lot of disclosures about national security that occurred last cycle when there was potential that the FBI had leaked certain information.  The members of Congress on the other side of the aisle, Hillary Clinton, and others talked about how there was so much concern about classified information -- we’re seeing such silence and outrage from the media, from others with the current disclosures now with things that may or may not have happened towards the 2016 election when it comes to this side.
So I think there’s a vast difference when it comes to how the disclosures are approached.  
Yeah.
Q    Sean, on North Korea, what is President Trump’s position toward North Korea, and what is his decision for the North Korean policy?
MR. SPICER:  On the which --
Q    North Korean policy.
MR. SPICER:  On the politics?
Q    No, policy.  
Q    Policies.
MR. SPICER:  Oh, policies.  Well, I mean, we’re very troubled by the launch of missiles that have occurred from North Korea.  I think that’s why the THAAD missile system that we’ve started to deploy into South Korea is so important.  We’re continuing to work with the government of South Korea to make sure that they have the defenses necessary to protect themselves.
The deployment of a THAAD system is critical to their protection, as witnessed by this weekend’s ballistic missile test.  China and the United States in particular both understand the threat that North Korea poses to the region.  And I think that there’s areas of concern that we can work together to protect the country.
Trey.
Q    You had called on me.
Q    Today was International Women’s Day.  There’s a lot of concern about access to healthcare for women.  Will the President commit to reaching out to female Democratic lawmakers as the next two phases of this healthcare bill continue?  And additionally, what is the President’s stance on access to birth control for women across the country?
MR. SPICER:  I think that question was asked and answered by Secretary Price yesterday.  With respect to women’s health, the President has also made it clear that he intends to have a substantial increase in funding towards women community centers that fund women’s health services.  And that will be reflected in his budget.  
Margaret.
Q    Thank you.
MR. SPICER:  Sorry.
Q    Sean, is the President the target of a counter-intelligence investigation?
MR. SPICER:  I think that’s what we need to find out.  There’s obviously a lot of concern.  I mean, I mentioned to John there was considerable concern last cycle when a reporter was the target of one.  But part of the reason that we have asked the House and the Senate to look into this is because of that.
And I think it was interesting.  I think if you look at last week, all of a sudden these stories that keep coming out about the President and his links to Russia, it has continued to be the same old, same old, played over and over again.  The President has made clear he has no interest in Russia, and yet a lot of these stories that come out with respect to that are, frankly, fake.  
They are a series of fake allegations that at the bottom note, “While there’s no evidence to substantiate any of this,” it’s the same unnamed sources, “associates” that we get tagged with, and yet there is no evidence that continues to be shown.  And every single person that gets briefed on this shows that -- whether it’s Senator Cotton, Chairman Nunes, who has done a phenomenal job of trying to get to the bottom of this.
But it’s interesting, I think the double standard that exists between the concern about getting to the bottom of the allegations that -- with respect to the President, that there are so many other issues.  When you talk about --
Q    So he doesn’t know whether he is the target of a probing?
MR. SPICER:  But I think that’s one of the issues that we have asked the Senate and House to look into.  
I can tell you with respect to the other instances, you look at former DNI Clapper’s comments, he literally said, the DNI -- he said, “The DNI, which includes the NSA, FBI and CIA, did not find any evidence of collusion between the Trump campaign and Russian agents.”  Senators Rubio, Cotton, Burr, Chairman Nunes -- all of the people who have been briefed on this situation have come to the same conclusion.
And it is interesting how many times this fake narrative gets repeated over and over and over again, and yet no evidence has ever been suggested that shows the President has anything to do with any of the things that are written.  It’s a recycled story over and over and over again.  And I think that there’s a bit of -- it’s amazing, the President goes out last week, does this joint session, and then literally 24 hours, stories start getting recycled about potential issues that come up that literally continue to offer no fact, nothing but the unsubstantiated rumors over and over again.  
And yet, what is ignored is when you have someone like former DNI Clapper go out and literally say that they “did not find any evidence of collusion between the Trump campaign and [Russian] agents.”  You have Rubio, Cotton, Nunes all say the same thing that they’ve been briefed that there’s nothing -- and yet this fake narrative --
Q    Sorry, just want to make sure that I’m understanding you.  Are you saying that there is a possibility he is the target of a counter-intelligence probe involving Russia?  Because you just connected those two things.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no.  I think what I’m saying is that there is a difference between that narrative and then the narrative that has been perpetuated over and over again. 
The concern that the President has and why he asked the Senate and House intelligence committees to look into this is to get to the bottom of what may or may not have occurred during the 2016 election.  But the interesting -- Margaret, is that when you look at every single person that’s been briefed, they’ve all come to the same conclusion -- that nothing happened during the 2016 election tying him to Russia.  And yet the fake narrative continues over and over and over again, and the idea that it has to -- it continues to be recycled without any substance, without any evidence, needs to stop.
Yes.
Q    The President said he was tapped.
Q    He said his wires were tapped.
Q    He said this as a fact.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, and that’s why we’re --
Q    So you’re saying he doesn’t know whether he was wiretapped?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, that’s not what I said was --
Q    Well, he doesn't know he's the target of an investigation.  
Q    That his wires were tapped.
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, one at a time.  I said that the President made clear on Sunday that he has asked the House and the Senate intelligence committees to use their resources and their processes to examine the facts and come to a conclusion.
Chris.
Q    Since you’re talking about whether things are true or not, let me ask you -- following up on something yesterday, you seemed to acknowledge that the President was wrong when he tweeted that 122 prisoners released by the Obama administration from Gitmo had returned to the battlefield.  In fact, it was mostly by the Bush administration.  Will he retract, or even apologize for that, given that he also called it a “terrible decision” by the Obama administration, and given that that was incorrect?  That there still has been no proof either of his tweets about widespread voter fraud or the wiretapping?  Does the President have a credibility problem?
MR. SPICER:  No, look, I said yesterday -- I think Trey asked the question -- that the President meant the total number of people.  
Q    But he said the Obama administration.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, I’m actually explaining it.  That’s why you asked the question.  He meant that the total number of people released from Gitmo was 122.  What the President -- but just to be clear, there’s a big difference -- under the Bush administration, most of those were court ordered.  The Obama administration took great steps -- they talked about -- it was a campaign promise, frankly, from day one to close Gitmo.  This President is very clear that he understands the nature of the threat that the people in Gitmo pose to our nation, and the recidivism rate that there are among people that we have released.
That is a concern that he shares.  The reason the Bush administration did it was in many cases they were under court order.  The Obama administration made it actually a priority to let people go and to actively desire to close that camp and to release more and more of those people, especially in the waning days.  There is a huge contrast between the posture and the policy of the last two administrations on how they were dealing with Gitmo.
This administration understands and the President has been very clear that he understands the people that are kept in Gitmo pose a danger to our country and to the rest of the world.  There’s a big, big difference between the posture of those two.
Q    Do you acknowledge that the tweet was wrong?
MR. SPICER:  I just said it.  I said that the tweet -- he meant that it was -- the totality of the people.  That’s what I said to Trey yesterday, I’ll say it again to you today. 
Dave Boyer.
Q    So can I just follow up on something else you said, Sean?  A totally different topic, because you said that you’re in full -- you’re in sell mode, completely in sell mode.  And I wonder if the President sees this as a test of his ability to make a deal, something that he really talked about, something that voters responded to on the campaign trail.  Is this essentially, does he feel, on him that this is him going to show the American people that he can get this deal done?
MR. SPICER:  Well, he gets -- he is a dealmaker.  He’s a negotiator.  He’s a world-class business leader.  And he’s been highly successful at it.  So if anybody can get a deal on something, it’s going to be Donald Trump.  That’s part of the reason I think that the American people -- what they saw in him, that there was so much broken with Washington that when it came to the big problems -- whether it was domestically or internationally -- that if somebody could come in and work across party lines, work with another country to get a deal that was in the country’s best interest, he had that skillset.  And that’s why they, frankly, elected him President.  
So I think he feels very good about the product that we’ve put out.  We are in sell mode.  We want to get this done.  But the President has an open mind.  He enjoys meeting with people and hearing ideas about how to make this country better, how to create jobs, how to create a better healthcare system, how to create better schools.  And if there’s someone that comes up with a better idea that will help lower costs and increase access, he’s certainly going to listen to it.
Dave Boyer.
Q    Sean, yesterday in the President’s meeting with the deputy whips he was talking about his tax cut plan.  He said it’s going to be the biggest since Ronald Reagan, maybe even bigger.  He said, “I know exactly what we’re looking at, most of us know exactly the plan.”  So my first question is really easy.  Tell us about the plan.
MR. SPICER:  What the plan is?
Q    The tax cut plan.
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, I’m going to wait until -- thank you, I appreciate the layup, Dave.  (Laughter.)  But I’ll leave it to him to work with Congress.  When we’re ready to roll it out, we will do just that.  We’re not there yet, so let’s go on with the next hopefully --
Q    Secondly, building on these jobs numbers today that look very positive, obviously there’s a lot of CEOs out there who are excited about the possibility of a tax cut plan, and yet the President has also expressed a lot of concern about the national debt.  If you’re going to get a tax cut on the level of Ronald Reagan, a historic-sized tax cut, how are you going to do that, balance the needs for continued job growth with the concerns about the debt?
MR. SPICER:  Because I think that one of the best ways to get the national debt down is to grow the economy.  The more the economy is growing, the more we can get it at three, four, five percent, the more the deficit goes down.  That’s just the best way to tackle the deficit is to grow the economy, put people back to work, create a deeper manufacturing base.  I mean, that is -- between that and some of the efforts that the President has put in to make government more efficient and effective, and save money at that level, those are the two things that I think combine to get the deficit down.
Jennifer.
MR. SPICER:  Hi, Sean.  Of the more than 13,000 Syrian refugees who are in this country, less than 150 of them are Christian, Shia, or Yazidis -- the same groups that the U.S. government acknowledges are literally being at risk of being wiped off the map.  So I wonder, now that Secretary Tillerson has had time to settle in and as you review the refugee program, immigration policy, is this something that’s being discussed?  Is this a priority to give these groups some relief?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that you know that when we talked the first time about the executive order, it was something that we acknowledged.  There is definitely an area where -- in the executive order that we just passed, one of the areas that we talked about was -- and I’d have to go back and look at the exact phraseology, but we recognize that certain groups, and they can be religious in nature, are being persecuted, and I think that that’s going to be a factor on how we look at that program.  
It’s something that the President, as you mentioned, he’s talked about in the past.  It’s something that Secretary Tillerson has acknowledged.  And that’s not just refugees coming into this country, but I think one of the reasons that we need safe havens in Syria is to make sure that groups and individuals, whether they be part of a group or religion who are being persecuted have a degree of safety that they can count on.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Appreciate it --
MR. SPICER:  No, no.
Q    Mike, Maria.
Q    Right here, thank you.
MR. SPICER:  It’s International Women’s Day, Mike.
Q    Exactly.  Thank you so much.  So the President is on the record saying that he supports some sort of legalization for many of the undocumented people in the country.  And you know there’s a DREAMer that was caught in the raids in Seattle, Washington.  We don’t know if he is going to be released or not.  Does the President want to or plan to meet with DREAMers to talk about what’s on his mind about gathering ideas for some sort of legalization?  And if so, when would that meeting occur?
MR. SPICER:  The President, I think, has talked about how he wants to tackle this holistically, and back to Chris’s question a second ago, I think he has made clear that if there’s someone who has the ability to strike a deal, to get people in a room and acknowledge well, we have to stay true to our principles, that we can get a deal on a way to fix our broken immigration problem, it is him.
We are not at that phase yet.  This is something that he has talked to senators about, and I think that, as we continue to move forward, obviously, the focus now is on Obamacare, repealing and replacing it with this program.  But it is something that we’re going to continue to move forward with, and as a comprehensive thing -- not just the illegal issue, but the visa issue, how we deal with the other folks that are in this country.  But stay tuned, we’ve got more to go on this.  We’ll go further.
What’s that?
Q    No meeting on the works with DREAMers?
MR. SPICER:  There is nothing on the schedule at this point.
Q    I'm sure you're aware of reports that the President had ordered the Pentagon to step up the attacks on al Qaeda in Yemen.  Does this mark a new strategy rather?  And does the President delegate now to the Pentagon attacks on either ISIS or al Qaeda?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the President talked about this a lot during the campaign, about giving the authority and trusting the generals and the decision-makers of his national security team with executing what they need to, to prosecute the war on terror and the war against radical Islamic terrorism.
So it’s not a question of delegating authority.  There are certain things -- and we addressed this in the briefing in previous weeks -- but there’s a big difference.  He’s not delegating the authority, but making sure that they have the ability and the timeliness to act in an appropriate manner to prosecute the case and to go after terrorists in a way that they probably weren’t last time.
So I mean, there is a big difference between the approach of this President and the last administration in terms of giving the generals and the leaders in the national security team and the Defense Department the tools and authority they need to prosecute the case against ISIS.
Sarah.  Gabby, sorry.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  You’ll get it one day.
MR. SPICER:  I know.  You guys switch.
Q    Israel’s defense minister said yesterday that U.S. officials had sent a direct warning to Prime Minister Netanyahu against annexing parts of the West Bank.  I wanted to know if that was at the request of President Trump.  And then also, if you could tell us where the White House is in terms of reaching a deal with Israel on what they consider permissible settlement construction.
MR. SPICER:  Well, as you know, yesterday, the President spoke with Prime Minister Netanyahu.  That conversation largely had to deal with areas of regional security.  I don’t have anything further to readout on that, and I know that when they met here at the White House, there was discussion of settlements, and the President was very clear about what his desires and his wishes were.  I think as we continue to follow up with Israel in the coming weeks, we will have more on that. 
Q    Thank you.  Ronica Cleary with Fox 5.  I have a follow-up question to actually his asking about the thousands of women who have chosen to strike today, and you saying that it is a free country.  But at Channel 5, we’ve reported quite a bit on the schools and the districts that are closing because so many women chose to strike today.
So it is a free country, but what would be the President’s reaction to, if you will, what is more important; the students being at school today or the woman’s right to strike and kind of make a statement, if you will, on this day? 
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, thanks, Ronica.  I think it’s an important question.  I mean, you’ve -- I know, locally, this affects a lot of individuals throughout Northern Virginia and Maryland and the District.  So look, I think -- I haven’t talked to the President specifically about this.  Obviously, as I mentioned, people have a right to express themselves under our First Amendment, as the President is doing today by making sure that we appropriately salute the contributions that women make to this country.  
But there’s clearly an impact in the case of schools -- localities throughout the country, here in the greater Washington, D.C. area.  But I think that that concern is best utilized by parents through their local school boards and through their city councils and mayors, whether or not they found it appropriate for that to occur.  I have not spoken to the President about this, but I think there’s a balance.  And I think that -- I would hope that we should use this opportunity to recognize the role of women in the workplace, in the family, and throughout society for the contributions that they continue to make and have made in the past in making the country as great as it has.
So with that, one last thing, just to clarify.  I think Jill asked this, but I just want to be really clear on one point, which is, there is no reason that we should -- that we have to think that the President is the target of any investigation whatsoever.  I’m sorry, that was Margaret.  I apologize.
Q    Specifically counterintelligence.
MR. SPICER:  Right, and there is no reason to believe that he is the target of any investigation.  I think that’s a very important point to make, and so --
Q    So retract your previous --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no.  It doesn’t -- what I’m saying is -- hold on.  The one question dealt with whether or not the tweet dealt with wiretaps during the thing, the other is an investigation.  They are two separate issues, and there is no reason to believe that there is any type of investigation with respect to the Department of Justice.
Thank you, guys.  I’ll see you tomorrow.  Thank you.  See you guys --
Q    -- leaks?
MR. SPICER:  Not that -- I can’t comment.  Thank you, guys.
END
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:04 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Good morning, everyone.
Q    Afternoon.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  Appreciate the -- John Roberts fact-checking from the seat.  (Laughter.)  Good morning -- good afternoon.  (Laughter.)  It’s not my fault, it’s on the paper.  
After receiving his daily intelligence briefing this morning, the President led a National Economic Council listening session with CEOs of small and community banks.  Since 2008, the number of small banks has declined 30 percent.  The dramatic increase in regulation following the financial crisis has been a major driving force in the decline of these banks.  Dodd-Frank alone has resulted in 22,000 pages of new regulations.  
While large banks can hire armies of compliance officers whose sole purpose it is to ensure they meet the ever-growing number of regulations, it increases the cost of doing business for community banks, leading some not to engage in some forms of lending, or simply due to the time and costs involved.
Our community banks are key funding sources for small-business owners, entrepreneurs, farmers and ranchers across the country, many of whom can’t qualify for traditional loans.  They provide approximately half of all loans to small businesses.  By reforming the regulatory system so that it is efficient, effective, and appropriately tailored, we will stop treating these critical institutions in our communities the same as banks that have exponentially more in assets, enabling them to engage even more with small businesses and entrepreneurs that stimulate local economies.
The banks participating in this listening session are members of the American Bankers Association and the Independent Community Bankers of America.  A full participant list is available to those who are interested.
Yesterday I noted the continued signs of good news in our economy in terms of hiring, and the morning reports showed that consumer comfort has risen to the highest level in a decade.  I’m sure last night you also saw the report that illegal southwest border crossings are down by an extraordinary 40 percent, a significant deviation even when you consider the seasonal trends.  These measures reflect that both the economy and the border are already responding to the President’s agenda, even while we’re still in the beginning stages of putting his policies in place.
The country and the world are clearly ready and waiting for the change that the President campaigned on and is already delivering.  Right now, the President is holding a legislative affairs lunch with OMB Director Mulvaney and key members of Congress on his plans for the federal budget and repeal and replace that we’ve talked about.  
This is just the latest opportunity to continue the dialogue between the President and members on Capitol Hill on turning his ambitious agenda into action.  The strong relationship between President and congressional leaders will be key as the budget process moves along.  As Director Mulvaney has been saying, our budget blueprint will be released in mid-March, and the President is working collaboratively with both his Cabinet and Congress to create a budget that keeps the President’s promises to secure the country and make the most efficient use of taxpayer money.
In attendance at the meeting from Capitol Hill are Senator Crapo, the Chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, Chairman Cochran; the Senate Chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee; Senator Mike Enzi, the Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee; Senator Bob Corker of the Senate -- member of the Senate Budget Committee; Congresswoman Black, the Chairman of the House Budget Committee; Congressman Thornberry, the Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee; Congressman Jim Jordan of Ohio; Congressman Meadows of North Carolina; the Chairman of the House Freedom Caucus; and Congressman Rokita of Indiana. 
Later this afternoon, the President will meet with former Secretary of Commerce Pete Peterson.  Then the President has a meeting with Secretary of Homeland Security Kelly and the Director of the CIA, Mike Pompeo.
And finally, the President will make remarks to the Senate Youth Program around 4:00 today, a tradition that began with President Kennedy and has continued through every administration. The President is honored to be speaking to this distinguished group of young men and women who are interested in pursuing careers in public service.
I also want to mention that right about now, the Vice President is giving the keynote remarks at the Latino Coalition’s Policy Summit.  His remarks focus on the particularly negative impact of Obamacare on small businesses, many of who have been unable to hire more workers, or were forced to scale down their operation due to high taxes and burdensome requirements that were imposed by the law.  
The President is dedicated to improving the healthcare system for every American, including small businesses owners who have especially been suffered -- have had to suffer through complying with thousands of pages of regulations and rules.  That’s exactly why he’s working with Congress to enact the American Health Care Act, which he was glad to wake up this morning and see approved by the House Ways and Means Committee.  
Also today, the President was pleased to see his Ambassador to Israel, David Friedman, voted out of committee.  We had hoped to see Seema Verma, who would be confirmed as the administrator this week as the administrator of Health Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services at the Department of Health and Human Services.  Unfortunately, Senate Democrats continue to unnecessarily delay her confirmation.  At this critical time when we’re talking about healthcare, it’s ironic that they refuse to consider someone with such amazing expertise in this area.
Seema Burma has worked for over 20 years in healthcare policy.  She has redesigned Medicaid programs in several states, including Indiana, Iowa, Ohio and Kentucky.  She’s worked with governors’ offices, state Medicaid agencies, state health departments, state departments of insurance, as well as private companies and foundations.  She’s unquestionably and uniquely qualified for her position, and especially now that health reform is at the top of the President’s agenda, it’s time to get her in place.  This delay by Senate Democrats at this critical time is unacceptable.
On a scheduling note for the weekend, the Vice President announced yesterday that he’ll be in Louisville, Kentucky on Saturday with Governor Bevin.  The Vice President’s Office will have further details for you on that trip as we get closer.  
Finally, I want to take a moment to acknowledge that today is the 10-year anniversary of the disappearance of Former FBI Agent Robert Levinson from Kish Island, Iran.  The Trump administration remains unwavering in our commitment to locate Mr. Levinson and bring him home.  The Levinson family has suffered far too long, and we will not rest until his case is resolved.  And with that, I’ll take your questions.
Hallie Jackson.
Q    I got a couple of topics for you, if you don’t mind.
MR. SPICER:  Of course.
Q    Julian Assange says the CIA has lost control of its entire cyber weapons arsenal.  Does the President agree?
MR. SPICER:  I think, as we’ve commented before, there’s grave concern that the President has about the release of national security and classified information that threatens and undermines our nation’s security.  Obviously, he believes that the systems at the CIA are outdated and need to be updated.  We are not commenting on the current situation, as is U.S. government policy, but I think the situation technology-wise at the CIA, the President has acknowledged, needs to be updated.  The CIA put out a statement regarding the current situation, and I would refer you to that.
Q    Follow-ups on that.  Is he going to talk about that with Mike Pompeo today?
MR. SPICER:  He gets a daily briefing from the director, and I’m not privy to the contents of his discussion, but obviously issues of national security, including that, are probably something that gets discussed.
Q    And then some Republicans have said Julian Assange should be imprisoned.  Does the President agree?
MR. SPICER:  I think the U.S. government has had a position on Julian Assange is -- a position in the past, and I don’t see anything that has changed that.  He has compromised in the past -- and undermined our national security, and I think I’ll leave it up to the Department of Justice to further comment on their disposition of him.
John.
Q    Second topic was on healthcare. 
 
MR. SPICER:  Second topics?
Q    Second of two topics.
MR. SPICER:  It’s like an interview, not a press briefing.
Q    The President tweeted just a little bit ago that he believes that healthcare is coming along great.  We’ve also been watching Paul Ryan deliver a pretty lengthy PowerPoint presentation --
MR. SPICER:  Very good PowerPoint.
Q    -- seeming aimed at convincing Republicans to get onboard this plan.  Isn’t that a sign that healthcare is not actually coming along great?
MR. SPICER:  I think anybody who has been in Washington for a few days or longer recognizes that any major piece of legislation takes a lot of explanation.  The President has been very committed to talking to members of Congress.  He had another meeting last night.  Something as complicated as this, that deals with one-fifth of our economy, that was a major takeover of our healthcare system, isn’t a simple thing.  
It’s a major, complicated piece of legislation that’s got three prongs to it.  And this is the first one -- the reconciliation piece that starts to chip away at finally repealing Obamacare.  When they passed Obamacare, they rushed it so quick they gave the then-Secretary of Health and Human Services great authority to enact certain aspects of it.  We now -- that would be our phase two, is having Secretary Price go through the pieces of Obamacare that he has been given the authority to, when they passed it, to help unwind a lot of the things they did. 
And then phase three is stuff that has to be done through other pieces of legislation that does stuff like allow people to sell insurance across state lines; that allows small businesses to pool.  So there’s a lot of facets to getting this pushed through, and I think that one of the things that we’ve been able to do quite effectively is talk to members, especially in the House, but the Vice President has been very active on both sides of both chambers to communicate how this is a comprehensive strategy in three prongs to repeal and replace it with something more effective.
Q    -- for example, roll back Medicaid expansion freezing until 2018?  Would he support that?
MR. SPICER:  Look, Hallie, I think this is going to through the process of -- it’s working its way through Ways and Means today, there’s a mark-up in the House Energy and Commerce Committee, and I think that’s where we are going to continue to see action -- in the House, and then when it goes to the Senate the President will continue to engage very actively with the House and the Senate to get this done.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  New York City First Lady Chirlane McCray said in a statement that Donald Trump should keep his hands off women’s bodies, women’s healthcare, and Planned Parenthood, which has done just fine without President Trump’s advice.  I wanted to know what the response from the White House was on this.
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean, with respect to Planned Parenthood specifically, the President has been very clear that he’s pro-life.  We’ve worked with them to talk about making sure that there’s a difference between taxpayer funding of abortion and women’s health services.  We have, and the President has committed to making sure that funds for women health  community centers is going to be reflected by a substantial increase in his budget.  He’s committed to doing that, and he’s trying to figure out a way to make sure that the focus of taxpayer money is spread towards community centers that provide vital health services to women, and that we’re not using taxpayer funds for abortion.
John Roberts.
Q    I just want to follow on Hallie --
MR. SPICER:  Which one?
Q    In an unrelated topic.  (Laughter.)  Just so you’re prepared.  On healthcare, Senator Tom Cotton of Arkansas today sent a series of tweets in which he basically said, this is dead on arrival in the Senate, go back to the drawing board, adding that it is absurd for the committees to be voting on something that hasn’t even been scored yet.  What does the President think of what Senator Cotton said today?  Does he plan on having a conversation with him?
MR. SPICER:  Well, we’re going to engage.  He has talked to Senator Cotton, and will continue to talk to any senator that has questions or concerns or ideas.  It went through the Ways and Means Committee last night.  I think they started at something like 10:15 yesterday morning.  It is an 18 --
Q    Has he talked -- 
MR. SPICER:  I don’t believe he has talked to Senator Cotton.  He’s meeting with members right now.  As I just mentioned, he had dinner last night with Senator Cruz.  He’s continuing to work both sides of the aisle, both chambers.  As I mentioned yesterday, I think you’re going to see a very aggressive, a very robust push.  We continue to have the team out talking to local media, local radio, op-eds placed, talking to local leaders.  
We believe that the more we talk about the comprehensive, three-prong approach that we have to doing a lot of the things that conservatives have talked about -- to bring back cost containment, to get people to be more patient-centered in the healthcare decisions they make, allow more choices -- it’s going to bring people on board.
But the thing that’s really interesting, John, about the current approach is that, no matter where you are, especially on the conservative side, you cannot possibly believe that the current healthcare system is an effective program.  It is a monstrosity.  It is a government gone wrong.  And I think --
Q    I hear that, but -- 
MR. SPICER:  And I think that we will continue to engage with him and other members of the House and Senate that have ideas, but it’s going to continue to work its way through the process.  As I mentioned, it went through the House Ways and Means Committee.  It’s currently going through the House Energy and Commerce Committee.  When the House passes it, and it goes over to the Senate, I’m sure Senator Cotton and other senators will have an opportunity to have their say.  That’s part of the process.  We welcome his ideas and his thoughts, as we do with other senators.
But the President has continued to do tremendous outreach, and our staff has continued to do that.  Mick Mulvaney has been on the Hill, Vice President Pence has maintained a very aggressive schedule, as well as other members of the administration, and we’re going to get this thing passed with all of their input and ideas.
Q    Was the President aware that Lieutenant General Michael Flynn was acting as a foreign agent when he appointed him to be the national security advisor?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t believe that that was known.  I would refer you to General Flynn and the Department of Justice in terms of the filings that have been made.
Q    Had the President have known that, would he have appointed him?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know, John.  That’s a hypothetical that I’m not prepared to ask.  I don’t know what he discussed prior to being appointed in terms of his background, his resume, his client base.  I don’t know any of that.  I know that, from what I have read, that he has filed the appropriate forms with the Department of Justice, and I think you should ask him and subsequently them if you have any questions about this specific filing.
Jon Karl.
Q    Sean, just following up on Senator Cotton, he told me just a short while ago that he believes that this bill might actually make things worse than the current Obamacare.  What do you say to Senator Cotton?
MR. SPICER:  I respectfully disagree, and I hope we have an opportunity for the team to continue to not only talk to him about what we’re trying to do and how we’re trying to do it, but that we’d love to hear his ideas.  I mean, this isn’t -- as I mentioned the last couple days -- we’re not jamming this down people’s throat.  We’re welcoming ideas and thoughts.  We think this is a great vehicle to restore a patient-centered healthcare bill to drive down costs, and I think Senator Cotton clearly recognizes that the current version of healthcare that is out there right now is not sustainable.
And so we welcome his input into this process.  We think that the work that we’ve done prior to putting this together with the House is something that reflects a lot of the best ideas, and we would continue to welcome his input on this.
Q    Are you open to major changes --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, Charlie.  It’s not -- I’m not open --
Q    Is the White House open to major changes or is it --
MR. SPICER:  I think the President has said before he wants to hear members’ ideas.  He believes that this bill encompasses the best of ideas and the best way forward.  But again, we’re going to let the process work its will through the House and then subsequently through Senate.  And if members have ideas, we want to hear them and want them to be part of it.  
This isn’t getting jammed through, and we welcome that, and that’s why the President continues to meet with folks.  He met with individuals yesterday.  He going to go meet with them today.  He’s going to be hitting the road.  He wants to hear members of Congress, outside groups, physicians, healthcare providers, patients.  But he wants people to have an input in this to make sure that we have the best possible bill that serves their needs and that don’t look back, like we do now with Obamacare, and say, I wish was had done this right.
We’ve got a system that, frankly, isn’t working.  And I think that, no matter where you are on the political spectrum, you have got admit that either you or a loved one, or a friend, or a colleague isn’t getting the care they deserve, or isn’t paying what they thought they would be paying.  And I think we have to do this right so that we don’t look back the way we do now and regret the way that it was done.
Charlie.
Q    Senate and House conservatives said that they want sort of a return to a 2015 Obamacare repeal effort.  If that effort landed on the President’s desk, would he sign it?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the effort that is going through right now is the vehicle that is what people are on board with.  I think one of the things that we have to remember is that the process, this three-pronged process, is done for a particular reason.  The reconciliation process -- which I know for most people, it sounds like a very arcane, inside-baseball congressional term -- but it only allows for certain things to happen in that repeal process.  
And that's why we've been very clear -- and I think Paul Ryan laid out, Dr. Price has laid it out, and Mick Mulvaney is laying it out when he goes up to the Hill -- that there's a reason that we keep talking about it in three prongs.  Because there are only so many things that you are legally allowed to do through the reconciliation process.  
When the Democrats jammed this through, they did it in a way that they did it basically in two steps.  They jammed it through the reconciliation process, number one.  And number two, they gave broad authority to the Secretary of Health and Human Services so at the time -- that she could unilaterally do certain things with healthcare and implement certain things that we now have to undo in the same way.
What we've done that's different, though, is frankly, add a third prong, which allows for additional legislative vehicles that will go through the House and then to the Senate, that will allow some of the core conservative principles that we've talked about for, frankly, decades, about allowing more competition, allowing people to pool, allowing people to do things that we think will allow lower prices to come out of the process.  And I think that's a big difference in how -- 
Q    So if a repeal lands on the President's desk, he would not sign it?
MR. SPICER:  It is going to land on his desk, because we're going to go through this process.
Q    I mean repeal without replace.
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, I think the way that we're doing now I think is the right and the responsible way to do this.  This bill will land on the President's desk.  He will sign it.  We will repeal Obamacare and we will put into place a system that will be patient-centered that will allow the American people to have greater choice and lower cost.
Blake.
Q    Sean, with the pushback that you're getting so far with healthcare, do you think it is realistic to have both healthcare and tax reform done in 2017?  And I ask you that because Mitch McConnell was asked about this day, and he talked about there being certain constraints, and that the tax reform portion of it could be a 2018 item.
MR. SPICER:  I think we feel very confident that we're going to get a lot done -- continue to get a lot done this year.  Tax reform is high on the President's priority list.  I think it's high on the American people's priority list.  And especially as April grows closer and closer, and people look down at their federal tax form and realize how much they're paying, and we see companies pledging to come back recognizing that these companies bought into the President's vision and agenda to make America more tax and regulatory friendly so that they would create jobs, manufacture more here.  That's something that he's committed to.
He understands how important it is.  Look, the President is uniquely qualified as a businessman, a successful businessman, to understand what a good business climate does to job creation and to manufacturing.  And I think his commitment isn't just a campaign promise; it's something that he has lived by for decades now, understanding that that's what spurs economic growth, that makes one place more attractive to invest in or to hire more people or to grow jobs.  And so for him, this is deeply personal.  And I think that you're going to see Secretary Mnuchin and others work on the contours of that in the next several weeks.  But we intend to maintain to the schedule that he laid out.
Q    The August portion is still the timeline?
MR. SPICER:  That's right.
Eamon.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  On drug prices, Congressman Elijah Cummings was here yesterday.  He said that the President was enthusiastic about his deal to cut drug prices.  Is the President enthusiastic about that?  And if he is, how much pain should drug companies be prepared to take here?
MR. SPICER:  (Laughter.)  Ironic that you're talking about drug companies and pain.  Maybe there's a pill for that.
Q    Of course.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.  I think the President -- as you know, one of the reasons that he reached out to Elijah Cummings initially is because they share that and I think, frankly, yesterday came to a lot of other areas where I think that they can find common ground and work on issues.  And I know that drug prices is something that he understands near and dear is helping many people get the care that they need, but the rising cost is something that is -- so I think as we look at the vehicle in terms of the specific legislation, they share a commitment to it.  And I think that there will be continued follow-ups not just between Congressman Cummings but others as to what the best piece of legislation is and how we get that home.
Q    The Democrats said that they're going to drop this bill in two weeks.  Is the President prepared to push the Democrats on Capitol Hill?
MR. SPICER:  I don't -- I think that's a bigger conversation that we have to have with House leadership in terms of some -- maybe it is that right vehicle.  Maybe Speaker Ryan and Leader McCarthy and Chairman Brady have other ways to achieve the same goal or work with Congressman Cummings.  I don't want to be prescriptive to the House as to how they work their will, but I know that the President has a commitment to that topic and that he wants to work with Congressman Cummings and others who share that same commitment.
John Gizzy.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.
MR. SPICER:  John Gizzy.
Q    Oh, Gizzy.  (Laughter.)
MR. SPICER:  You're both good-looking Johns -- (laughter) -- but I'm going to -- I'll come back.
Q    All right, thanks.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Two questions.  First, a Japanese news service is reporting this morning that the President will have a meeting with President Jinping of China in April.  Does this mean that there is a new meeting before their scheduled meeting at the G20 in July?
MR. SPICER:  I'm not going to comment on the President's schedule or foreign leaders at this time, John.  I think I've pretty much gotten that one down.  So until I have something further for you, I'm just going to let you get on to your next question.
Q    All right, thank you.  Going back to the meeting and to your opening statement about the banks, in the last campaign, candidate Trump campaigned hard on restoring the Glass-Steagall Act, which would put a barrier between commercial and major investment banks.  It, of course, was repealed in 1999 -- the repeal signed by President Clinton.  Senator Sanders campaigned on this as well, noted that it was in the Republican platform in Cleveland, and said in December he'd be happy to work with the Trump administration on restoring Glass-Steagall.  Is there any plans for the President to meet with Senator Sanders?  And is repeal of Glass-Steagall on his agenda?
MR. SPICER:  There's no current schedule to meet with him.  I'm sure that, as he has done with several other members of Congress from both sides of the aisle, that at some point, that will be scheduled.  But we don't have anything on the books for now.  
But look, he's shown -- and I think today was another -- or yesterday was another example, today another example of his willingness to reach across the aisle, his willingness to look into both chambers and not just business but labor unions and other industries where we can find common ground.  And I think if Senator Sanders and others want to work with the White House on areas of ways that we can improve the financial industry, we're going to do that.
Q    Are you still committed to restoring Glass-Steagall?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Erin.
Q    On infrastructure, can you give a sense of timing, where it is on the priority list, and if these new reports that say that the infrastructure in the nation is in really bad shape, does that give it new urgency?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President mentioned it in the joint address.  I think we're looking at a public partner private -- a public-private partnership as a funding mechanism.  There is a lot of work being done behind the scenes.  And I don't want to put a timeline on that.  
Obviously, as I just mentioned to Blake, we've got -- we're currently dealing with the repeal and replace of healthcare.  I think we need to move on to tax reform.  But that is definitely somewhere that is -- we're trying to figure out how to move that vehicle.  There will be further discussion of that as we get closer to the budget as far as where that fits into the piece.
John Decker.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  The President had this meeting last evening here at the White House with some conservative groups.  Out of that meeting, can you tell us whether the President was successful in twisting arms, getting these conservative groups to back this particular healthcare bill?  And just separately, I see on the President's campaign website that there is an event, a campaign-style rally planned in Nashville, Tennessee for next week.  Can you confirm that?  And why did you choose Nashville, Tennessee?  There's a Democratic congressman that represents Nashville -- it's Jim Cooper.  Are you hoping to get some Democrats behind this bill?
MR. SPICER:  So in the first part of that, you saw a lot of the statements that came out last night from some of the various groups.  They were very encouraging.  Their guiding principle is we want to get to yes.
I think one of the things that's really interesting, and I addressed it earlier, is that there's a lot of members, a lot of interested parties, a lot of groups that haven't fully heard the three-prong approach.  And I think Speaker Ryan did a phenomenal job today of really laying this out.  Dr. Price has done a good job.  That people need to understand the totality and the comprehensive nature of this; that there are three pieces of it.  And I think what happens sometimes is that the reconciliation piece of this gets lost as defining the totality of it.  And people need to understand the two other pieces that achieve many goals, that healthcare advocates and conservatives have fought for, for a long time that allow great competition, that allow small businesses to pool those resources together.  But there's a lot of things that occur in phase two and phase three that help bring down cost and create greater choice.  
It's amazing when you listen in to some of these meetings how often people say, I didn't realize that, and I didn't understand the full scope and totality of what the plan was.  It's very encouraging.  And then I think they -- without getting into details -- I think in a lot of cases, they've shared some ideas with the President that we might be able to find some common ground on.  So we'll take it one step at a time.
Go ahead.
Q    On the campaign-style rally?
MR. SPICER:  I would refer that question to the campaign.  I think the President is going to be traveling next week.  And then -- but there will be -- the details of that are listed on the campaign site.  There is going to be I think additional travel announced for next week on the official side.  And as we get closer to either the end of this week or the beginning of next week, I'll try to have more for you.
Katie.
Q    The President promised to immediately terminate DACA when he got in office.  It's been nearly seven weeks tomorrow and he still hasn't done it.  Can you definitively say if he's going to get rid of DACA?  And if not, is he giving them legal status?  And what's the plan for DREAMers?
MR. SPICER:  I think, Kaitlin, we've talked about the status of that and the -- and how many steps we have to go through on immigration.  In the past, I think we've made significant headway in achieving the President's priorities of starting the wall, driving down illegal immigration.  The numbers that came out last night show that even when seasonally adjusted, we see a 40 percent dip in the people crossing our Southern border.  That's a very promising sign.
That being said, the executive order, the second one -- there was a lot of effort put into making sure that that was rolled out effectively and achieved the goal of protecting the country that the President sought out to do initially.  So we're continuing to take steps on immigration, both legal and illegal immigration.  And as I've mentioned in the past, we'll have more as we go forward.
Q    So he does still plan to get rid of DACA?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President has been very clear about how he plans to address immigration as a whole, both legal and illegal.
Katie.
Q    Sean, the President is convening with conservative groups, but there's also opposition on the left.  Does he plan to -- he brought bipartisanship to Washington, finally.  (Laughter.)  Does the President plan to meet with groups like the AMA and AARP, which supported Obamacare but are not supporting this bill?
MR. SPICER:  I don't -- it would be ill-advised for me to start saying who he is going to -- but I think that what we've shown over the last couple weeks is the President's willingness to meet with individuals, senators, groups.  So I don't want to rule in who is going to meet, or out, but I think that I've said before with respect to members, and I'd say it again with respect to groups, that I think if people have ideas that will help provide a more patient-centered healthcare system that drives down cost, the President and the team here will be willing to meet with them.
So I don't want to be prescriptive in terms of telling them who they have to meet with.  Their day is pretty busy right now with the Hill, but I will get back to you on some of the other groups that they're going to meet with and we'll go from there.
Brian.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Two quick questions.  One, this morning at the National Press Club, a local business in D.C. filed a Superior Court of suit against the President in regarding Trump Hotel.  And I don't expect you to speak to that issue specifically, but their feeling less that -- as much as this administration has supported small business, couldn't he divest himself from this and support small business in the district?  First question.
MR. SPICER:  I'm really not sure -- how would he -- in terms of what?
Q    Well, there's 25 small businesses, restaurants, in the area, and they're saying that the Trump Hotel is taking all that business away from them.  And couldn't he walk away from it and help out the small business in the district?
MR. SPICER:  Well, as far as the President's -- obviously the President has made very clear in that December press conference at Trump Tower he doesn't have conflicts and he's done everything in accordance with the guidance that was given and gone well beyond what he ever needed to do.  But obviously, you can't -- your name is on certain things and that's a very big difference in terms of some of the properties that he owns.  But he understands the importance of small business.  
That’s why we’re meeting with community banks this morning to talk about the lending that they need -- whether it’s small business, entrepreneurs, farmers, ranchers throughout the country.  He understands the role of small business in our economy and how many jobs they provide, and I think he’s been a champion of it.
Q    Second question was, in his speech before Congress last week, he said it’s not too much to dream that at some point in time our -- and I’m paraphrasing -- our feet could be on foreign soil, and I’m guessing other planets.  With the NASA budget being released yesterday, I believe, is there a major initiative for this administration for space exploration?  Or are we just talking dreams?
MR. SPICER:  I’m going to let Director Mulvaney get into the details of the budget next week, or whenever that -- I’m trying to remember the calendar here.  But when the Director comes out he’ll talk about the specific funding levels.
As you know, we’re in the middle of this what we call passback provision where we’ve sent them from top -- numbers.  They’re sending us back their recommendations and their observations and edits and questions with respect to their budget.  So we’re going to take this one step at a time.
Q    When he said --
MR. SPICER:  Obviously he’s very keen on America’s role in space, and I don’t want to get into specific budget priorities or numbers until we’re ready to release them.  
John.
Q    You called on me.
MR. SPICER:  I’m sorry, April.
Q    It’s very important.  
MR. SPICER:  I know, I saw the hands.  (Laughter.)  
Q    So, Sean, just really fast, following up on John, we’re seeing the campaign information for next week in Nashville.  You said something about talk to the campaign -- who’s the campaign?
MR. SPICER:  I’ll try to help get you a name.  There is a campaign infrastructure still in place.  It would be inappropriate for me to be commenting on campaign activities from the podium.   So there’s a website up, same one that was during the campaign, and I would suggest that you utilize that.  But I’m only here as an official in the government so I don’t want to get into that.
Q    Now, yesterday, going to back to Congressman Cummings, you talked about some other issues that they talked about in that meeting, where they found common ground.  I want to hit two issues.  The vote irregularities, voter fraud and voter suppression -- where does the President see this coming together.  We heard from Congressman Cummings, but where does he see -- we understand he’s saying that voter fraud is real when there are other people saying it’s not.  But then there are factual documents and cases of voter suppression.  So how is there a marrying of that in this President’s eyes?
MR. SPICER:  I think that’s why he’s asked Vice President Pence to look into it.  I would disagree with the ascertation of -- I think there’s also factual evidence of people voting illegally.  We saw that in Texas a couple weeks ago and in other places.
So part of the reason that he’s asked Vice President Pence to chair this task force is to look into the issue.  But we welcome input in other areas, and it’s an area that they’ll continue to discuss.
Sara.
Q    I’m not done.  HBCUs, HBCUs.  Now, also, Congressman Cummings said that when he talked to the President and he brought up the issue of funding for HBCUs, President Trump said to Congressman Cummings that the President did not ask for money.  Now, they came here, according to many of the presidents that I’ve canvassed, they came here with the intent of -- the fact that they were going to get some money from this executive order.  
MR. SPICER:  I don’t think the executive order is the --
Q    That’s what their belief was.  But then what I understand is that there was talk about investment in these colleges from Steve Bannon.  One president wrote this down saying that “we are looking for a plan from you to invest in HBCUs and we will execute it when we get it.  And they’re looking for full funding for Title 3, Pell grant full funding -- fall, spring and summer, -- as well as a one-time $25 billion investment.  What does this White House think about this plan that they’re trying to give back to this White House, especially at a time when you’re looking at cutting domestic spending?
MR. SPICER:  I think, when they were here, we were pleased to roll out the executive order that talked about making historically black colleges and universities a priority in this administration, moving that sort of point person into the White House so that we could coordinate a whole-of-government opportunities for -- we talked about this.
Looking at the different educational opportunities -- expand government, whether it’s health or investment in sciences or even stuff like ROTC and NROTC programs that are some of these that span out of the Department of Defense.  But we’ve got to look at how we’re providing government assistance in a whole host of ways to historically black colleges and universities.
I think the issue of funding will be properly addressed in the budget, and at that time -- but obviously this is something that has been discussed.  The President --
Q    Is the President’s request realistic?  Is this funding realistic?
MR. SPICER:  April, I’m not going to negotiate the budget from here, but I think that the President has been -- made very clear that the vital role that they play in our society.  And I think he’s shown that initially by the executive order that he unveiled, and we will have further information for you as we get closer to the budget.
Sara.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Circling back to what you said about critics characterizing the budget reconciliation bill as the entirety of repeal-replace, how quickly does the President want to see Republicans move on phase three, the companion legislation?  Does he envision those unfolding simultaneously?  And then given the early opposition to the budget reconciliation bill, does the President maybe want Republicans to recalibrate their strategy when it comes to that companion legislation?
MR. SPICER:  I am not going to start to tell Speaker Ryan or Leader McCarthy [sic] or the Whip, Mr. Scalise, how to release and when to release legislation.  But I think obviously we need to make sure that members and all Americans understand the totality of this so -- at a schedule that they see fit.  And I’ll let them unveil that schedule that -- they talk about the totality of this plan and the comprehensive nature in all three prongs that make up the repeal and replace part of this.  
It’s important I think, though, for people to understand that there’s a commitment to do all those things that we’ve talked about -- whether it’s pooling or -- across state lines.  There’s a lot of principles and things that we’ve discussed that I think are important to let people -- to know about.
Q    What’s the assessment of the situation in Afghanistan?  What is the assessment of the situation in Afghanistan, because there have been a series of terrorist attack there?  And does the President have plans to send additional troops to Afghanistan?
MR. SPICER:  So on troops I’d refer you to the Department of Defense on that one.  I think we are in the middle of a comprehensive review on our policy in Afghanistan that -- working with our Afghan partners and the Department of Defense and our key military leaders to create an approach to address Afghanistan to defeat ISIS.
So we’re in the middle of that process.  When we have more we’ll update you.  But I think the Department of Defense is probably the best place to go to get that.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Today, hundreds of U.S. Marines were deployed to Syria.  So I’m wondering how involved was the President in that decision-making process, and is this part of his wider anti-ISIS strategy?
MR. SPICER:  Obviously, the President was made aware of that.  This is something that was done in consultation.  He understands the regional issues that need to be addressed there, and, again, I would refer you back to the Department of Defense on that.
Yeah.
Q    Sean, thank you.  I have a follow-up question to Hallie’s first set of questions on WikiLeaks.  My question is --
MR. SPICER:  I feel like Hallie gets, like, eight questions --
Q    The Republicans are calling for Julian Assange to be in jail or be arrested.  What about the tech companies that he says that he will work with to give them these CIA hacking techniques?  Should there be any legal repercussions for tech companies willing to sort of embrace and use this technology that you’re taking a stance against, if you will?
MR. SPICER:  So, number one, I’ll go back to the statement that we don’t comment on validating or authenticating allegations of this sort as the U.S. government -- in terms of U.S. government policy.  I will say that the President obviously feels deeply concerned about anybody, an individual or anybody, that seeks to undermine the national security of our country.  
I don’t want to -- stay within my purview here, but I do think that I would check with the Department of Justice in particular about -- if a program or a piece of information is classified, it remains classified regardless of whether or not it is released into the public venue or not.  And so I would just suggest that someone consult with them regarding the legal repercussions of any individual or entity using any piece of still-classified information or technique or product that hasn’t been declassified.  
There’s a reason that we have classification levels, and that’s to protect our country and our people.  And that’s something that we have to maintain, regardless of how it’s thought out.
Zeke.
Q    Sean, two questions for you.  One, back to General Flynn, how concerning is it to the President and to the White House that a registered foreign agent was selected to become -- was the national security advisor for a brief period of time?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I think this is what he did for a living.  And as the President said in the press conference, talking to individuals that are within the realm of the duties that you’re going to perform is part of your job.  
Q    -- compensated for --
MR. SPICER:  I understand that but he was being compensated, he wasn’t being compensated as part of the transition, as far as I’m aware.  And so he was a private citizen at the time.  And when you’re a private citizen, you’re allowed to engage in legal activities.
I don’t have anything further on that, but I think there’s nothing nefarious about doing anything that’s legal as long as the proper paperwork is filed.
Q    Sean, just real quick, it was just -- several reports out of the State Department from our colleagues that on Secretary Tillerson’s upcoming trip to Asia, he will not be taking any press with him on that trip.  That’s a breach of precedent, certainly of the last several bipartisan administrations.  Is it concerning to the White House that the administration’s foreign policy might not be effectively communicated to the American public and around the world because there isn’t a press pool with the Secretary of State?
MR. SPICER:  This is the first I’m learning of it, I’d be glad to follow up with you, Zeke.  I don’t know that.  I think you all know that we have been a very transparent administration in terms of access to the President and his activities here.  I’d be glad to follow up with the Department of State and follow up -- that you can share that with your colleagues.
Margaret.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Yesterday you said the President had no reason to believe there was any type of investigation with respect to the Department of Justice.  Did the Justice Department give you that assurance?  Because they’re telling The New York Times they did not.
MR. SPICER:  I’m not aware of it, but that’s my point, is that we’re not aware of anything.
Q    -- been told by the Justice Department that there is no investigation.
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    So there might be one, you just don’t know.  
MR. SPICER:  Right, I said I’m not aware and we’re not aware.  And that’s why we want the House and the Senate to do what the President has asked of them, to look into this.  But, no, we’re not aware.
Q    To discover if there is an investigation.
MR. SPICER:  No, to look into the situation.  
Q    The Justice Department is saying, though, that they never gave you the assurances that you gave us.  
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  No, the assurance I gave you, Margaret, was that I’m not aware.  And that is 100 percent accurate.
Q    So when you said, no reason to believe, it was, I’m not aware if there’s an investigation?
MR. SPICER:  That’s right.  Right.  I mean, I don’t know that they’re not interchangeable.  I’m not aware.  I don’t believe -- look up in a thesaurus and find some other ways, but I don’t know that there’s a distinction there that’s noteworthy.  But we’re not aware, I don’t believe, that that exists.
Q    What’s that based on?
MR. SPICER:  That’s based on that I’ve not been aware of.  But that’s the answer to that.  When someone is asking me if I’m made aware of something and the answer is no, then the answer is no.
Q    But the question was whether he was the target of a counterintelligence probe.
MR. SPICER:  Right, and the answer is, we’re not aware.  I don’t know how much clearer we can be on this.
Q    So it’s just that White House is not aware if the President is the target of a counterintelligence probe?
MR. SPICER:  Correct.  I’m not sure what we’re dancing around the same question.
Q    Well, because I think yesterday, when you came out and corrected and clarified, people took that as a definitive answer that, in fact, that was not the case that you said --
MR. SPICER:  No, it means we’re not aware.  I don’t -- just that should be the definitive answer.
Vivian.
Q    Thank you.  I have two questions, but a really quick follow-up to Zeke’s.
MR. SPICER:  So that’s three.
Q    Two and a half.  (Laughter.)  So can you elaborate a little bit on how and to what extent Michael Flynn was involved in shaping the current Turkey policy for President Trump?  I mean, was he engaging with the Turkish leaders and --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t have anything on that.  You can contact the NSC on that.  I’m not aware.
Q    Okay.  So for my two real questions.  First, is there any official response to the lawsuit in Hawaii over the revised travel ban?
MR. SPICER:  I think we feel very comfortable that the executive order that was crafted is consistent and we’re going to go forward on this.  But I think, by all means, I don’t want to -- we feel very confident with how that was crafted and the input that was given.
Q    Okay.  Thank you, and the second thing is Nigel Farage was at the Ecuadorian embassy in London today where Julian Assange happens to be staying.  We don’t know if they met or not, but was he there?  I mean, he’s a close ally of President Trump.  Was he there in any official capacity?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t keep his schedule.
Q    Was he delivering a message?  Do you know if there was contact on that?
MR. SPICER:  I have no idea.  No.  I have my own concerns here, keeping track of what everyone is doing.  I generally don’t worry about what is going on across the pond.
Johnathon.
Q    You already gave me one, but just to follow through.  (Laughter.) 
Q    I’ll take his.
MR. SPICER:  Wow, all right.  Hey, hey.
Q    But the question is not what, but Farage -- can you tell us he just wasn’t there on behalf of the White House?
MR. SPICER:  Sure.  I don’t -- this is silly.  I really don’t think asking where random foreign leaders are and whether or not they are there -- I’m sure he was there doing whatever on behalf of either the --
Q    -- ally leaders --
MR. SPICER:  He’s a member of --
Q    He had dinner with the President -- 
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  I understand that, but I don’t keep his schedule.  I’m not sure.  
Toulouse.
Q    Two questions on two different topics.  First, Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin sent a letter to Congress saying that Congress should raise the debt ceiling.  We know that the Office of Management and Budget director, Mick Mulvaney, when he was in Congress, he voted against raising the debt ceiling multiple times.
So is Mulvaney going to support the raising of the debt ceiling and does the President support that?  And is he going to push Congress to do that?
MR. SPICER:  I think we’ve got a few months to do that.  I think the Secretary was making Congress very much aware.  We got into -- have now been in the White House six weeks.  We’re approaching the 50th day here of this administration.  I think we are trying to deal with the situation at hand.  Part of the reason that the President has addressed a budget the way he has is to try to get our nation’s debt deficit and budget in order.  I think he’s continuing to show a tremendous respect for taxpayer money, the way we spend money and bring it down.  But obviously, there are certain things that are a little beyond our control when we walked into this building, and we’re going to work with Secretary Mnuchin and Director Mulvaney to address this issue, and obviously work with Congress.
Q    Second question on another Cabinet Secretary.  Scott Pruitt said today that carbon dioxide was not a primary contributor to global warming.  That obviously is at odds with global scientific consensus.  Does the President agree that --
MR. SPICER:  I think -- that’s a snippet of what Administrator Pruitt said.  He went on and said, I don’t think we know conclusively, this is what know.  I would suggest that you touch base with the EPA on that.  But that’s -- he has a very lengthy response, and so that is just one snippet of what the administrator said at that.
Anita.
Q    Two things.  One, I think you mentioned at the top but I’m not sure, that apprehensions were down across the border.  There was a question yesterday about the wall.  Is the wall still needed if the apprehensions are down?
MR. SPICER:  I think so, sure.  The President was very clear.  It’s not just needed, the President committed to doing it to the American people.  And I think, while we can have a good month, and I think we’ll see if that continues, that the President made a commitment to the American people to make sure that this isn’t just an anomaly, and that, while they might be down, I think we have to do what we can to protect our country, both in terms of national security and economic security.  So it’s of course still needed, and it’s a commitment that the President made, and I think one of the things that the American people, regardless of where they stand across the aisle, appreciate about this President is that he is a man that has kept his word.  He talks -- he made commitments to them, and he’s fulfilling them to make the country better.
Goyal.
Q    Sean, I said there was a second question.
MR. SPICER:  I’m sorry, you did.
Q    I think you’ve been asked this before but have been reluctant to say whether President Obama and President Trump have spoken since the inauguration, although President Trump was very forthcoming about that during the transition so I’m not sure why you wouldn’t mention it.  But I’m just asking that again.  And there was a report yesterday that said aides for both Presidents have spoken.  Can you talk to us about either of those things?
MR. SPICER:  I’d be glad to follow up.  Unfortunately I did not ask the President whether or not he spoke -- I’ll be back tomorrow --
Q    Can you follow up?  Can you ask about the aides?
MR. SPICER:  Yes, I can.  I will.  I keep my word too.
Goyal.
Q    Okay, well -- 
MR. SPICER:  Stealing what -- all the way --
Q    It’s actually me.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Lost your shot.
MR. SPICER:  Look at that.
Q    Can you tell about policy now on Guantanamo, how it might have changed, where things are with that?
MR. SPICER:  Where what, please?
Q    On Guantanamo, on whether Guantanamo will be expanded, whether detainees will be brought to Guantanamo, whether they will be transferred out.  Just where things are.
MR. SPICER:  I don’t have anything to announce with respect to its expansion or its use -- expansion use.  I think the President has commented on the importance of Guantanamo and the need to maintain that the people who are there are not people who seek to do anyone good.  They’re there for a reason, and he has no plans to close it, if that’s what you’re asking.
As far as the future use goes in terms of expansion, I don’t have anything to comment on at this time.
All the way in the back, yeah.  You got it, Goyal.
Q    All right, all right --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, Goyal.  (Laughter.)  You keep trying to steal his question.  
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Two questions please.   One is that -- as far as the attacks on the Indian American communities across the nation, they’re not new, it happened in the past also.  But the Indian American communities recently have been having candle vigils, have prayers, and all kinds of those things.  And also, the Indian ambassador met with the State Department officials -- President Trump recently.  So any presidential message for the Indian American community, how to stop these attacks at this time?
MR. SPICER:  I think with respect to -- are you talking about the event in Kansas City specifically?
Q    Yeah, and another one also.
MR. SPICER:  I think the President -- whether it’s the event that happened in Kansas City, other events, the attacks on Jewish community centers that continue to plague us -- we saw another report this morning of some unfortunate activity.  I think we’ve got to continue to call it out, we’ve got to continue to root it out, we’ve got to continue to engage law enforcement, whatever is the applicable level of law enforcement depending on the event.
But it’s something that I think all Americans should be outraged and disgusted by -- and stand up for the principles that unite us, and that’s what the President spoke so eloquently about during his joint address, and made it very clear that while certain policies may divide us as individuals, there are certain principles that can unite us.
John Frederick.
Q    And second part of my question, please, I’m sorry.  As far as the U.S.-India relations are concerned, they have been great in the past and now we have two businessmen in India -- Prime Minister Modi is also a businessman, and he -- President Trump of course a great, successful businessman.  So recently, high official visits have been going on from India to the U.S., meeting President Trump and officials, including foreign secretary and Commerce secretary and -- from the energy department from India.  So where do we go -- what is the future under President Trump’s administration of U.S.-India relations economically, trade, and bilateral -- all of those.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  I think he has talked about during the campaign and the transition establishing a deeper relationship with Prime Minister Modi and U.S. -- India and businesses.  And I think as we move forward in terms of our foreign policy, we’ll have further updates on that.
But as you know very well, he spoke very clearly and frequently about the relationship that we have and hope to continue to grow with India.
John Frederick.
Q    Sean, thank you.  During the campaign President Trump was not shy about his desire to get the United States out of these Middle Eastern wars, yet as a question earlier, we just sent 250 Marines into Syria.  Is President Trump committed to going to Congress to receiving authorization for an AUMF or a declaration of war if we continue to deploy United States troops overseas?
MR. SPICER:  Well, John, I think there’s a big difference between an authorization of war than sending a few hundred advisors.  And I think most in Congress would probably agree with that as well.  I think that’s a big difference between a hostile action and going in to address some certain concerns, whether it’s certain countries in the Middle East or elsewhere.  
I would refer you to the Department of Defense on that one.  I think the actions that he has done and taken with the advice that his generals have given him, his admirals as well, is something that we will continue to work on.  
Q    Two questions.  One, first off, kind of clarifying the difference between the campaign stop and also the healthcare rollout.  So Nashville will be kind of the campaign stop.  How will the White House kind of pick and choose how that goes, whether it’s going to be a presidential visit trying to sell the healthcare rollout, or one for the campaign?  And then a second question.  
MR. SPICER:  I think the campaign will make decisions with respect to how they want to spend their money and where they want to go.  And the White House will do the same.  But that’s something that every President back as far as modern history has done as well.  The President will be visiting several cities over the next coming weeks to engage the American people on the need to repeal and replace and other steps that he’s taking to deliver on the promises that he’s made as Commander-in-Chief.  
Q    And then a second question, I know Senator Cruz was here for dinner last night.  Can you characterize the relationship between the two men?  2018 will be here before you know it.  Do you anticipate the President will be there to support him in that effort?
MR. SPICER:  We got a few battles to get through legislatively, but I know that he enjoyed welcoming Senator and Mrs. Cruz and their two daughters last night to the White House.  They had a very enjoyable time and a very fruitful discussion.  But it’s something that he’s going to continue to do with members of both parties, both chambers, and not just here in Washington.  I think you’re going to see him continue to engage with governors and attorneys general and lieutenant governors.
The President truly enjoys this level of engagement.  He likes to sit down and talk about ideas, talk about the future of this country and get their input and ideas.  And I think they talked a little business and a lot of personal last night, and it was a very enjoyable thing.
With that, thank you, guys.  Have a great day.  I look forward to seeing you tomorrow.  I think tomorrow is going to be one-question Friday.  Thank you all.
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 3/10/2017, #21
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room

1:44 P.M. EST
MR. SPICER:  Happy Friday.  Good to see you all.  Good afternoon.  Two more days until the work week is over -- (laughter) -- full attribution to Rahm Emanuel for that one.  
As many of you know, today is day 50 of President Trump's administration.  We have a lot to talk about and a lot that's gotten done.  I also want to acknowledge that today is also Brian's birthday, so happy birthday to Brian.  I'll let you guys celebrate amongst yourselves afterwards.
In just these first 50 days, the President has taken many key steps towards delivering on the pledges he made to the American people as a candidate.  He has jumpstarted job creation not only because of his executive actions, but through the surge of economic confidence and optimism that has been inspired since his election.  President Trump knows exactly what businesses need to thrive and grow, therefore adding well-paying and steady jobs to the market.
Obviously, we're very pleased to see the jobs report that came out this morning.  It's great news for American workers.  During the first full month of the Trump presidency, the economy added 235,000 new jobs and the unemployment rate ticked down to 4.7 percent.  Notably, we also saw significant growth in the construction, manufacturing and mining sectors.  The unemployment rate ticked down and labor force participation rate ticked up, showing that even as more people are reentering the job market due to the economic optimism that I spoke about, businesses are continuing to grow and create new jobs.  
The President looks forward to continuing his work with the private sector to clear roadblocks to key infrastructure projects, withdraw from job-killing trade deals like the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and slash the bureaucratic red tape that makes additional hiring difficult for American businesses.
He has taken action to ensure the safety and security of the United States homeland, its borders and its people.  He has proposed great rebuilding of our nation's military, following a full review of our military readiness and supported by a $54 billion budget increase.  He's implemented new protections to prevent people from coming into our country that seek to do us harm.  As a result of the presidential memorandum that he signed on January 28th, the President has received a plan to defeat ISIS, designed by the Secretary of Defense and the national security team.
Just as he has promised during the campaign, he has made enforcing our nation's immigration laws a top priority, signing executive orders that start work on a Southern border wall, that enhance the public safety of Americans through ordering the strong enforcement of immigration laws that are already on the books, halting funding to jurisdictions in the United States that don't comply with federal immigration rules, and directing the Department of Homeland Security to hire a combined 15,000 new officers and agents to support the system and protect the nation.
He's outlined an aggressive legislative agenda that includes tax reform that brings relief to small business and the middle class, a massive commitment to infrastructure investment that will generate jobs and rebuild our nation, and repealing and replacing Obamacare.  In fact, just this week, he began working with Congress directly on repealing the worst parts of Obamacare and replacing it with the American Health Care Act.  And this particular legislation is just one prong in the President's comprehensive approach to reforming our healthcare system.  
The administration is also taking additional steps to stabilize health insurance markets and start bringing down costs for the millions of Americans that have been affected by Obamacare, such as stabilizing insurance markets through regulatory reform, including the ability to purchase insurance across state lines, providing individuals and families with lower access -- with access to lower-cost options by loosening the restrictions on the financial structure of plans offered through the Obamacare exchanges.
And finally, the President is committed to working with Congress on additional legislation that won't be subject to the budget reconciliation process, that will allow the purchase of health insurance across state lines; that will streamline the process of the FDA to bring down the cost of critical medicine; to allow for the expansion of health savings accounts to allow more Americans to use their funds for more healthcare costs -- healthcare-related costs, and so much more.
There's a one-page factsheet that lays out the three prongs of the President's plan to repeal and replace.  All Americans can see that one-pager that's available at WhiteHouse.gov/RepealAndReplace.  Feel free to download it and share it this weekend.
This administration is already looking forward to all that we've been planning to accomplish in the days and weeks ahead.  You should have a document outlining in each of your email boxes of the President's major actions during these 50 first days.  We've made it available to the public as well at WhiteHouse.gov.
In terms of the schedule for his 50th day in office, the President will be having a series of meetings and calls, moving even further along on some of the most significant campaign promises that he made to the American people.
After receiving his daily intelligence briefing this morning, the President led a healthcare discussion with key House committee chairs.  The President thanked and congratulated the chairs on successfully ushering the American Health Care Act through the first phase of the legislative process.  He noted that he was pleased to see the bill pass through both committees -- the Energy and Commerce committee, and the Ways and Means committee -- with unanimous Republican support.
They discussed working together on additional legislation to further work towards turning healthcare into a system that works for every individual and family and business.  Together, the President and Republicans in Congress will act decisively to keep their promise to the American people.  In attendance at the meeting, including the Vice President, were Congresswoman Black, the chair of the House Budget committee; Congressman Brady, the chair of the House Ways and Means committee; Congressman Walden, the chair of the House Energy and Commerce committee;  Congresswoman Foxx, the Chairman of the House Education and Workforce committee; and Chairman Goodlatte of the Judiciary committee.
In addition to this Hill outreach, senior officials at the Department of Health and Human Services have met with the American Medical Association to discuss the bill, and will be meeting with additional stakeholders in the coming days.  The President is committed to making the system better, and that includes making sure his team hears feedback from all interested groups in pursuit of a more affordable and accessible healthcare.
This afternoon, the President had a call with President Abbas, the Palestinian authority.  We’ll have a readout of that call soon.  The President had lunch with Secretary of State Tillerson, and this afternoon the President will meet with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, Dr. Ben Carson.  He looks forward to discussing HUD’s mission to create strong, sustainable, and inclusive communities with quality, affordable housing, especially the ways in which we can partner with the private sector to come up with innovative solutions to turn our public housing system around and empower our struggling communities.
Looking ahead to the weekend, the President will spend this weekend here at the White House in a series of meetings with his team.  The Vice President’s office has already announced the details of his trip to Louisville, Kentucky, where he will participate in listening sessions with small businesses and job creators throughout the community, and then, joined by Governor Bevin, will hear from local small businesses.
The Vice President will discuss the President’s economic agenda, especially the repeal-and-replacement aspects of Obamacare, and how it will reduce the burden on small businesses.  He will then conclude with formal remarks at the Trane parts and distribution center. 
Also coming up, Judge Gorsuch confirmation hearings will begin on March 20th.  Yesterday, the American Bar Association reported their committee determined that, by unanimous vote, Judge Gorsuch was given a “well-qualified mark for the Supreme Court.”  The President looks forward to seeing Judge Gorsuch receive a speedy and fair hearing, and an up-and-down vote on the Senate floor.
Finally, the President’s weekly address is out.  It discusses Women’s History Month and his plans to repeal and replace Obamacare.  It aired this morning on Facebook Live.  It is now available to watch on YouTube and whitehouse.gov.  Obviously, I encourage everyone to go check it out.
And with that, I’d be glad to take your questions.  John Roberts.
Q    I was going to say, your pin is upside down.
MR. SPICER:  John Roberts always helping with the fashion tips.  (Laughter.) 
Q    It’s still upside down.
Q    You wanted -- is that a distress call, Sean? (Laughter.) 
MR. SPICER:  Appreciate that.
Q    House of Cards promo. 
MR. SPICER:  Thank you, no.  There’s no promo.  (Laughter.)  John, now on to your questions.  (Laughter.)  But thank you.
Q    Our involvement of sending rangers and Marines into Syria marks a dramatic change in our presence on the ground there, and I’m wondering, how much autonomy is the President giving General James Mattis to involve U.S. forces on the ground in Syria?
MR. SPICER:  A U.S. Marine artillery unit and a team of rangers have recently positioned in Syria to provide a combined joint task force, Operation Inherent Resolve, the commander, the agility to expedite the destruction of ISIS in Raqqa in particular.  The exact numbers and locations of the forces are still a sensitive order to protect the location of the forces, but there will be approximately an additional 400 enabling forces deployed under existing authorities for a temporary period to enable our Syrian partnered forces to accelerate the defeat of ISIS, specifically in Raqqa.
I think, as I’ve mentioned before, one of the things that the President has ensured is that the commanders have the flexibility to do what they need to fulfill the mission.  The President is obviously, as Commander-in-Chief, made aware and signs off on all of those missions, but at the end of the day, it’s going to up to the generals to execute their mission to make sure that we continue to defeat ISIS and protect the nation.
Q    Now our involvement there really sort of complicates the whole picture because we’re aligned with the Kurds, but then at the same time, a NATO ally, Turkey, sees the Kurds as the enemy.  And then there’s what happens with Russia and its involvement with the Syrian government.  So the big problem with Iraq was we never planned for the day after.
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    So what are the plans for the day after here when Raqqa falls?  Who occupies it?
MR. SPICER:  Well, one of the things that I mentioned in the script that is part of what the President has done during his first 50 days is issue an executive order on January 28th for the Secretary of Defense to submit a comprehensive plan in consultation with the joint chiefs and other members of the national security team to defeat ISIS.  That is part of that plan.
And so I think you are seeing a comprehensive approach to not only how we’re going to engage in Syria, but the total defeat and elimination of ISIS.  So that is part of an ongoing process that the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, and others have been involved in, in briefing the President.
Q    But does the President have an idea of who should occupy Raqqa?  Should it be Kurkish forces?  Should it be a coalition?  Should American forces stay there?
MR. SPICER:  I think that as we devolve that plan I’ll have more for you on that.  I think you’ve already killed one-question Friday, but we’re going to get back to it.
Jon Karl, one-question Friday.
Q    Okay, I’ll make it one.  Sean, the chair and ranking member of the House Intelligence Committee have asked the Justice Department to turn over any information that they have that there was any wiretapping of President-elect Trump, candidate Trump at Trump Tower.  If there is no evidence that any wiretapping took place, will the President apologize to President Obama for making such a serious charge?
MR. SPICER:  Let’s not get ahead of ourselves.  I think it’s important to see where that goes, and I don’t want to prejudge their work at this time.
Jim.
Q    But if there’s no evidence, I mean, what’s he --
MR. SPICER:  But I think you’re asking, well, what if there’s evidence?  I’m not going to get into a series of hypotheticals, prejudging the outcome of a report or an investigation that hasn’t occurred yet.  I think once that’s done, we’ll respond appropriately.
Jim.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Senator Cory Gardner was reported by Politico yesterday to have said he doesn’t believe that a $14-billion wall along the Mexican border is the best way to provide border security.  Does the White House see support for the border wall weakening in Congress?
MR. SPICER:  No.  The President was very clear that was something that he campaigned on and promised the American people as an effort to both protect our national security and our economic security, and he’s going to fulfill that pledge.  He’s already started to work with the Department of Homeland Security on both the plans, and the funding mechanism and the bidding and the RFP process will roll out slowly -- or shortly, I should say.  But that’s a pledge that he intends to maintain.
John Bennett.
Q    Sean, a lot of action on the Hill of course with healthcare lately, but April 28th is right around the corner, government funding expires.  Given that during the transition period you guys asked for a short-term CR so you could weigh in once you were in office, what’s the White House doing right now to avoid a shutdown?  I talked to some sources, they couldn’t point to specific talks.  So what’s the state of play there?
MR. SPICER:  Well, Director Mulvaney is going to release his budget on the 16th.  That’s the first step in working with them to get the budget under control.  We’re approaching $20 trillion of our debt, and I think we need to get spending under control. 
And so part of funding the government goes hand in hand with keeping track of what we’re spending it on and how we’re spending it on, what our priorities are.  We’ve begun that passback process that we talked about internally within the executive branch.  Director Mulvaney has had several conversations with members on the Hill on both sides, and he’s going to continue to have them.  I know the Vice President has been actively engaged as well.
But to your question, I mean, that’s part of the process.  We need to release a budget first about what our priorities are for the coming fiscal year, and then make sure that we do what we can going forward.  But this goes hand in hand with that.
Q    -- finish out the current fiscal year, so does the --
MR. SPICER:  I understand.  That’s fiscal year ’17, but I think they go hand in hand.  I think you need to close out FY17 and then I think our budget lays out where we want to go in FY18.  And I think once we have a handle on FY18, we can start to backfill 2017.
Q    -- a specific ask, you want cuts for the rest of ’17?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to -- I appreciate -- we’re not having that discussion here.
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  And I will honor the one-question Friday.  The President has said in the past the he welcomes compromise, and they’re open to compromise on the immigration legislation that’s coming up.  This morning when she spoke at the Christian Science Monitor press breakfast, Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi said that she would like to see the comprehensive immigration package that passed the Senate but was stopped in the House brought back, and that was her version of a compromise on immigration.  What’s the administration’s position on what former Speaker and Minority Leader --
MR. SPICER:  I think you’re referring the Gang of Eight bill, correct?
Q    That’s correct.
MR. SPICER:  I think the President’s been very clear during the campaign trail that that’s not a bill that he supports.  But he looks forward to engaging with members to find a way forward to fix our broken immigration system.
That bill in particular I think is a nonstarter.  It was a nonstarter when it came out the first time.  I think it continues to be a nonstarter.  But the President recognizes that the system is broken and that he wants to work with Congress to fix it.
Hunter.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Does the White House believe there’s such a thing as the deep state that’s actively working to undermine the President?  
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that there’s no question when you have eight years of one party in office that there are people who stay in government who are affiliated with, joined, and continue to espouse the agenda of the previous administration.  So I don’t think it should come as any surprise that there are people that burrowed into government during eight years of the last administration, and may have believed in that agenda and what to continue to seek it.  I don’t think that should come as a surprise to anyone.
Q    And will the Director of the CIA or the DNI have a presidential mandate to seek these people out and fire them or purge them from the government?
MR. SPICER:  That’s not part of the CIA’s mandate under any circumstances, so I don’t know on that.  
Blake.
Q    Sean, thanks.  The DNC just put out a statement a little while ago saying it is President Obama who deserves the credit for the February jobs numbers.  
MR. SPICER:  I’m sure they did.
Q    My question to you, how much do you feel that President Trump should be credited for that, and how would you characterize the economy that President Trump was handed over by President Obama?
MR. SPICER:  Look, numbers are going to go up and down.  We recognize that.  But I think there’s no question when you look at the CEOs that hire people and the CEOs that have talked about the investment that they want to make in America -- you can look back over the last several administrations, I don’t believe I’ve ever seen the number of CEOs and businesses come out and talk about investments and continuing investments and the expansion of investments or hiring based on the vision and agenda of an administration the way they have in this one.
And so it's not just a question of what we believe.  I think if you look at the automakers, the other manufacturers, and, frankly, some of the service industries that have come out and talked about the investment that they're going to make, or the continuation of a project that they had going, or the movement of one -- of a manufacturing plant or job investment -- those speak for themselves.  It's not a question of what we believe.  I think it's a question of the commitment that U.S. manufacturers and job creators and businesses are making because they want to buy into the President's agenda and vision for creating a more tax and regulatory business-friendly environment to grow here.  And I think that those speak for themselves.
Q    Do you believe, though, that he's had -- that the policies already have had an impact on them?
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.  Look at the confidence indexes.  They're all going to the top.  I think the stock market has generated over $3 billion of additional wealth since he was elected.  There are several economic indicators that show signs of strength because of the President's vision and agenda.  And I don't think that that's any secret.
I mean, when you talk to the economists, when you talk to business leaders, they have confidence in the President's agenda that it will yield for a more favorable business climate to hire more Americans, to expand the manufacturing based in America, to make us more competitive around the globe.  And so I do believe that.  But I don't think it's a question of what I believe or what the administration believes.  I think if you look at what outside economists and what business leaders do, they confirm that. 
Eamon.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  In the past, the President has referred to particular job reports as "phony" or "totally fiction."  Does the President believe that this jobs report was accurate and a fair way to measure the economy?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I talked to the President prior to this, and he said to quote him very clearly -- "They may have been phony in the past, but it's very real now."  (Laughter.)
Sara.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Could you clear up what appears to be some tension between what you said yesterday about when the administration or the President was made aware of General Flynn's foreign lobbying ties and the AP reporting today that the transition team was informed of Flynn's potential need to register?
MR. SPICER:  So there's a big difference between when he filed, which was the other day -- two days ago -- and what happened then.  What the AP is reporting, just so we're clear, is that a personal lawyer of General Flynn's contacted a transition lawyer and asked for guidance on what he should or should not do.  The lawyer was instructed that that wasn't the role of the transition, and that it was up to the personal lawyer to work with the appropriate authorities or subject matter experts to determine what was appropriate and what was not appropriate in terms of filing.
But this was a personal matter.  It's a business matter.  It's not something that would be appropriate for a government entity to give someone guidance on when they should file as an individual -- as a private citizen.  
That was the guidance that was given, which is consistent with what should be done.  And so I don't think it should be a shock to anybody that if you asked a government lawyer what you should do in your private capacity as a citizen, they're going to tell you you should consult experts in that area to determine what you should or should not do.
Q    That advice was -- the transition was aware of that advice, why wasn’t that then -- was the President made aware that that recommendation had been given to his national security advisor?
MR. SPICER:  Well, wait a minute, Sara.  There are tons of individuals that consult with the lawyers and with ethics experts and say, I own this stock, will I have to sell it?  I own a business.  I own this house.  
And for the most part, they're given guidance as to, hey, go seek professional help, consult with this entity, consult with a lawyer.  It’s almost like asking someone for tax advice, calling -- and what you will -- if you call the IRS and say, hey, I want to know what I should do this, they will tell you to consult a tax attorney.  
That's not the job of a government official, is to tell you what you should or should not do in your capacity as a private citizen.  And so that's a vastly different scenario that any -- whether you -- regardless of what department you call in government, if you call the Department of Education and ask them about education standards, they’ll probably refer you to a local entity or to a teacher if you're asking about your own child.  That's not why government officials -- they're very clear about the line between private action and government action.
Jordan.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Does the President agree with House conservatives that the sunset date for the Medicaid expansion should be moved up to the end of next year? 
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the bill that is before the House right now, the reconciliation piece -- and again, I cannot reiterate it enough -- is part of a three-prong process.
But the current process does several things.  Number one, it’s the first time that you're going to have a full addressing of an entitlement like this in decades.  It is actually a very, very good thing for conservatives when you look at how we're going to address Medicaid and an entitlement that many conservatives have fought for years need to be addressed.
But that being said, the President has also been very clear through all of the discussions -- and I’ve commented on that throughout the week -- that as he meets with members of Congress and outside groups, that if someone has got an idea that can make this legislation more accessible, give more choice to the American people, drive down costs, make it more patient-centric, he wants to listen to it.
But I think right now that's where the bill stands.  We're going to continue to listen and work with members of the House and then eventually the Senate.  And so I don't want to prejudge where -- the process itself.  But the bill was crafted in a way that I think represents the President’s thinking and in a -- very smart way of addressing entitlements and going forward.
Francesca.
Q    So just to put a pin in it, the President is willing to negotiate on the sunset of the expansion of Medicaid?
MR. SPICER:  Right.  Right now the date that's in the bill is what the President supports.  He is willing to listen to individuals on different aspects of the bill that might make it -- that might achieve the goals that he set out.  But it’s not a question of negotiation.  We have a date in the bill, and that's the date in the bill.
But I think as the bill continues to work its way through the House -- and that goes for Speaker Ryan, he’s got members that are approaching him with ideas and I’m sure he’s listening to them as well.   Senator McConnell is probably dealing with the same issue in the Senate.  And that's the way that the process is going to work. 
And I’ve made it very clear since the get-go that this process is going to be one where we're going to take the best ideas, we're going to listen to individuals and try to make sure that we achieve the goals that the President has laid out and the principles that he has laid out.
Francesca.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Piggybacking off John and John, at a breakfast this morning -- the same one he referenced -- Nancy Pelosi also said, "It couldn't possibly be true" of the President's allegations against the former President, "because that is not how our system works."  She also said "Obama would not do that" and "it would be a waste of time" for the House Intelligence Committee to investigate that allegation.  Does the White House have any evidence to refute House Minority Leader and former Speaker Pelosi's claim?  And could you explain why the President hasn't asked the FBI chief about this directly?
MR. SPICER:  I think we spoke very clearly about what we'd like to happen last Sunday and I'm going to reiterate it:  We believe that the House and Senate intelligence committee have the appropriate forum and process and staff to look into this matter and report back.
Q    Sean, on Flynn.  Can you say that the President was informed at all about this arrangement?  
MR. SPICER:  No, he was not.
Q    The need to register as a foreign agent?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    And then did this set off any alarm bells with anyone?
MR. SPICER:  No, just so we're clear, you wouldn't -- General Flynn filed with the Department of Justice two days ago.  How would anyone know that he was going to -- I mean, that's sort of like asking -- 
Q    What about the need to file?
MR. SPICER:  That's up to his personal lawyer.  I mean, again, each person that goes through the process in government seeks counsel in many cases regarding the assets they own and the activities they conducted as to what they have to do or not do.  But this is something that -- it's like asking whether someone needed to file -- if they had a client, whether or not they have to file a lobbying disclosure form.  That's not up for us to determine.  That's up for them and their counsel to determine if they engaged in activities in the past or whatever it is.  Or if a doctor needed to go and up their certification, that is not up for the government to determine.  There are certain private citizens' activities that you conduct and you seek counsel on, or professional advice.  That's not up to the government.  And that's exactly how the system worked.
Q    But how did that not raise a red flag?  I mean, you have an attorney calling -- 
MR. SPICER:  You already got your question, John.  We're doing one-question Friday.
Q    But this is an important point.
MR. SPICER:  No, it's not, John.
Q    Because you have an attorney calling the transition saying that the person who is in line to be the national security advisor may need to register as a foreign agent.  And that doesn't raise a red flag?
MR. SPICER:  No, it's not a question of raising a red flag, John.  It's a question of whether or not they gave them the advice that they're supposed to, which is, it is not up to them to make decisions as to what you need to do or not do.  As you know, there are certain activities that fall under each of these requirements as far as what the threshold is, what activities, who the funding source was, et cetera, et cetera.  It is not up to -- nor is it appropriate, nor is it legal -- for the government to start going into private citizens, seeking advice and telling them what they have to register or not.  That would be the equivalent of walking through someone's tax return and saying that's not a deduction that you should take, that is.
That's why, when you contact these agencies, they will tell you, you should seek counsel or professional advice or expertise in whatever matter it is.  That is not up to them to determine, plain and simple.
Glenn.  I called on Glenn -- John, we’re going --  
Q    Moving beyond the legal question here.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.
Q    Just to follow up with John, moving beyond the legal question here, this is an issue of judgment about who you guys wanted here in your administration.  There were published reports that your potential national security advisor had dealings with the government of Turkey, a controversial regime at this moment in time.  Congressman Cummings sent a letter to Mike Pence during the transition informing him of this and raising a red flag.  Mr. Pence was on television, I believe yesterday, saying twice that he had no knowledge of that letter.
MR. SPICER:  That's right -- no, no, that's not -- hold on, it stop there.  No, no, hold on, before you accuse the Vice President of certain things -- 
Q    Yeah.
MR. SPICER:  Now, what he said was that he was not aware of the filing, just so we're clear.  And he wasn't.  Thank you.  Go on.
Q    But just in terms of the larger question here.  Forget about filling out forms and the legalisms here.  What does this say about the transition team's judgment about still appointing him as national security advisor when you had knowledge of this information?
MR. SPICER:  No, but you're asking me -- forget about the legalisms.  That's what we ask people to do, is follow the law.  You can't forget about the legalisms.  
Q    No, no.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, that's what you said.  And what I'm saying is, that's what we did.  They consulted a lawyer, which everyone who had something of -- is advised to do.  That lawyer consulted the transition lawyer, who said, it is your job to consult the appropriate lawyers.  
Q    I'm moving beyond the legal issues, I'm saying in terms of -- we're moving beyond the issue of the papers here.  We're talking about the judgment that the President, the Vice President and your team made to select this man as national security advisor when you had information that he had these dealings with Turkey.  Why did you guys still make that decision?
MR. SPICER:  But it's a question -- what dealings are you referring to?  The fact that he had a client -- he was also the head of the department of -- the Defense Intelligence Agency, unbelievably qualified, 40 years in the military with impeccable credentials.  I mean, so what is it?  That he -- what exactly are you getting at?  Because so far, he has impeccable credentials, he had a stellar career in the military, widely respected, and I think for you to start to impugn his integrity -- 
Q    No, but Vice President Pence said that yesterday -- that he wouldn't have that -- 
MR. SPICER:  But again, but there was no disclosure at the time.  And the question is, is that if his counsel worked with whomever he worked with and determined that he didn't, that's up to him.  But it was up to him.  The burden is on the individual to seek the legal advice or professional expertise to decide what they have to file and not. 
I mean, we could literally have a hypothetical question about somebody who made an inappropriate filing on their tax returns or another -- or a professional qualification.  At the end of the day when people present it with you, they are advised to seek expertise and counsel and legal advice about what's appropriate and what's not.  That is not -- it is not up to the transition attorney to go through someone's livelihood and determine what they need to see.  They were given the proper legal advice at the time, which was to seek expertise in that matter.  He had already obtained counsel, and that's -- 
Q    Let me just sort of clarify.  The transition officials were not overly concerned by his relationship with the government of Turkey?
MR. SPICER:  It's not a question of overly concerned, Glenn.  The question is, did they provide him the avenue that they were supposed to, which is, did they tell him to seek counsel, and they did.  And that’s what’s supposed to happen.  That’s it, plain and simple.
Yes.
Q    Sean, I guess the question for you very simply would be then right now, does this raise concerns that there may be other members of this administration or other members that served in the transition that were or are currently lobbying on behalf of foreign governments right now that may be advising the President of the United States?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I think we trust people to fill out the appropriate forms that they need to, and in this case --
Q    But that’s what betrayed --
MR. SPICER:  -- and the President acted accordingly back in the thing, and he made the right call then.
Q    He may have been taking actions, though, he may have made the right call -- the national security advisor.
MR. SPICER:  But you’re asking me -- this is -- look, this is like saying -- can you tell me that the executives at NBC News have gone through every single person’s and reporters background --
Q    They’re not the President of the United States.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, I understand that.  But we trust people to fill out the forms that they’re required to do so in an honest and legal manner.  And in this case, he retroactively filed the forms that he was supposed to do, but we advised him to do what the legal and proper thing was, and that’s the right thing for this administration.
So we did the right thing then, and we expect every employee to follow the law.  This President, when it comes to ethics and when it comes to lobbying, he instituted a five-year ban, he banned people -- he has ran on a commitment to drain the swamp.  He has been very committed to making sure that we institute high standards here and that we’re held to them.
And so at the end of the day, when he found out that General Flynn had betrayed the trust of the Vice President back in the day, he let him go.  The President has high standards for everyone that works in this administration.  
So the answer to your question is, if somebody does something that is not in keeping with the President’s standards that he’s set for every single person in the administration they will be let go.
Q    So do you have full faith in all those people that are advising the President right now?
MR. SPICER:  I believe that everybody has done what has legally been required of them, but I can’t tell you that every single person has done everything.  I can tell you the President has made clear to every person in this administration you are expected to live up to the high standards that he has set for them, and that if you don’t you will be dismissed.
Q    Sean, the removal of South Korea’s President, what’s the reaction of the White House to it?  And also, we know that there will be a presidential election very soon in South Korea, and we know several leading candidates.  They prefer -- last confrontation was DPRK and also opposed the deployment of a THAAD system.  So does the White House looking to the impact of the election might bring?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I believe they have to have an election within 60 days.  There’s an acting President who we have strong relationships with, and we will continue to work with South Korea.  They are both an ally and a friend in the region.  This is obviously an issue that we continue to keep up with on the developments there.  It’s a domestic issue in which the United States takes no position in the outcome of that election.
It’s up to the Korean people and their democratic institutions to determine the future of their country.  The United States continues to be a steadfast ally, friend and partner to the Republic of Korea.  And that’s it. 
Q    Obviously, you guys were excited about the jobs report but maybe a little too excited, both you and the President tweeting within an hour of the jobs data coming out, which is a violation of the federal rule.  So I’m wondering I guess both if there is counseling in you and the President’s future?  But also what you’d say generally to critics who say, the risk of doing this is politicizing what should be kind of nonpartisan --
MR. SPICER:  What I understand is that that rule was instituted to deal with market fluctuations.  I could be wrong, but I believe that’s why it was instituted.  I think tweeting out “Great way to start a Friday,” here are the actual numbers that you all have reported, is a bit -- I mean, don’t make me make the podium move.  (Laughter.)  I mean, honest to god, like, every reporter here reported out that we had 235,000 jobs, 4.7 -- there isn’t a TV station that didn’t go live to it.  So to tweet out “Great way to start a Friday,” I think, yes, the President was excited to see more Americans back to work.  
I don’t think that’s exactly a market disruption.  I think that there’s a lot of excitement in this country when we look at the policies that the President has instituted to help put more Americans back to work.
So I mean, I understand the rule, but let’s --
Q    The Obama White House, for instance, went out of their way not to comment in that hour-long period.  They would rearrange the President’s schedule around it.  It was something that they and previous --
MR. SPICER:  I get it.  And I think there’s a difference -- 
Q    -- going forward, yeah.
MR. SPICER:  It’s not about commenting.  I think it’s one thing to give analysis and whatever; literally tweeting out great news.  I think, yes, we are excited that when the President and the rest of the team saw the news this morning, as reported on every television station, Twitter, the Internet and every major news site in the country and around the world -- we were excited to see so many Americans back to work.
So I apologize if we were a little excited.  And we’re so glad to see so many fellow Americans back to work.  But that’s -- Ashley.
Q    Sean, Congressman Cummings’ letter to the Vice President in November did lay out that General Flynn was being paid to lobby for Turkish interests during the campaign.  Why did that not raise a red flag to the Vice President?
MR. SPICER:  It’s not a question of raising a flag.  Remember -- I think we keep forgetting something -- his attorney then went to a transition attorney who was told, you need to seek counsel on this and get further guidance.  That’s the job.  It’s not a question of “raise flags,” it’s not for us to adjudicate whether or not someone needs to file under the Lobbying Disclosure Act, the FARA Registration Act.  That’s not the job of a transition attorney.  It’s to tell them to seek additional counsel, or to explain to them where to find that information, not to tell them what to do or not to do.
Q    But I’m asking about Vice President specifically -- not saying you should go to this attorney or giving legal advice, but why, when this information was brought to the Vice President’s attention, didn’t he raise questions, bring it to the President, look into it further?
MR. SPICER:  Because I think it’s fairly simple to say why didn’t this occur.  We’re going through several people.  The answer is, did they seek the appropriate professional advice and counsel, and they did.  And that’s the answer.
Alexis.
Q    I have a healthcare question for you.
MR. SPICER:  Oh, good.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Aren’t you relieved.
MR. SPICER:  That’s the appeal about it.
Q    Would the President be willing to sign legislation -- is he flexible about the refundable tax credit portion of the House bill?  Would he be willing to sign legislation that avoided that particular provision?  Because, as you know, conservatives are concerned that that’s an additional entitlement.
MR. SPICER:  I think that, more and more, as the President talks to members of Congress and outside groups -- number one, I think they’re excited to understand the totality of this, and I think he addresses this in the weekly address that you can at whitehouse.gov, that continues to explain the comprehensive aspect of this.  Our reconciliation piece, the administrative piece that Secretary Price will institute, and then the additional legislation -- buying healthcare across state lines, allowing small businesses to pool their things, allowing health savings accounts to expand, the streamlining of the FDA, going after medical malpractice -- all those things that bring costs down.
But as I’ve noted before, I mean, people have to remember that if you get your healthcare through your employer, which the majority of Americans do, you are not taxed on that, your employer is not taxed on it.  It is fairly inadequate and unbalanced for small business owners, ranchers and farmers, sole proprietors to have to face a disproportionate tax burden because they’re not a big employer.  I think this is something that conservatives should be embracing, and I think the more that they understand the comprehensive nature of this, they are beginning to support more --
Q    So the President wants it to stay, the refundable tax credit provisions?
MR. SPICER:  Oh, absolutely.
Q    Okay.
Q    Yes -- House Republicans that wrote a letter to the White House asking about why IRS Commissioner John Koskinen is still in his job.  Do you have any response to that?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t.  I’d refer you to the Department of Treasury on that.  Yeah.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  The other day, the President tweeted that, for the past eight years, during the Obama presidency, Russia “ran over” the United States and, in particular, picked off Crimea and added missiles, which the President described in his tweet as “Weak!”  Given that he seems to be focused on Crimea, at least as far as the tweet is concerned, will the President use the authority and funding granted him in the NDAA to send lethal defensive weapons to Ukraine, as has been called for by the House and Senate Armed Services Committee chairmans, and was in was in both party platforms, although the Republican language was watered down?  And if he’s not going to -- I did ask you this about several weeks ago when Senator McCain sent a letter asking for this -- if the President doesn’t want to do it, is that because he would rather focus his efforts with Russia on partnering to try to defeat ISIS?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think Ambassador Haley has noted at the U.N. that any attempt to undermine sanctions that currently exist because of the annexation of Crimea will remain in place until that issue is resolved.  I’m not going to -- the President, when it comes to his overall negotiating strategy, has made it very clear in a variety of circumstances that his philosophy is not one that says, “I’m going to tell you what I’m going to do.”  He holds his cards close to his vest to maximize his negotiating strategy.
Q    But why does sending weapons to Ukraine have anything to do with sanctions?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to get into the President’s negotiating strategy.  I will tell you that, as he continues to engage with the President of Russia and Secretary Tillerson --
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. SPICER:  I’m not.  We’re not -- Ryan, it’s your birthday.  You get a question.
Q    Going back to -- my staff, we’ve got about several dozen emails on -- we talked to congressmen this morning who were getting these emails saying, if you’re going to repeal and replace Obamacare, why not give everybody what Congress and Senators get?  Can you address that, since Congress won’t?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think part of what we’re trying to do, we -- someone asked the other day about federal benefits.  Right now, a third of the counties around our country have one provider.  That’s not choice.  I think the President understands that very clearly, and that’s, frankly, why he’s pushing the American healthcare -- you know, why we’re doing this, is that so many Americans have no choice, and that he wants there to be greater choice and lower costs.
By doing the stuff that we’re doing, especially the third prong of this -- allowing competition over state lines, taking the government mandates away from what they have to include -- that’s really going to institute more choice.  There will be more options.  
If you remember, prior to Obamacare, you could go out on the open market and go from a variety of different options and tailor what you or your family needed based on the conditions that you sought or the deductible that you wanted.  And choice dried up with Obamacare.  I think that’s the point, though, is that if you want more of that kind of a system, then this is the bill and the legislation and the comprehensive approach that you should be supporting.
Q    But specifically, the perception that somehow senators and congressmen get better care than the rest of us.  Can you address that?
MR. SPICER:  Well, that’s what I -- yes, I think that’s why we’re trying to pass it the way we are.  We want more choice.  We want more competition.  We want lower costs.  The American people deserve a better healthcare system, and that’s what this President is pushing for.
Margaret.
Q    Sean, did the White House sign off on Secretary Tillerson’s decision not to take the press with him on what should be an important trip to Asia, and the growing North Korean threat?  And what are his marching orders?  You talked a lot about the flexibility the President has given to his generals.  What flexibility has he given for diplomatic initiatives to his Secretary of State?
MR. SPICER:  As I mentioned at the beginning, the President is having lunch with Secretary Tillerson.  I know that the trip was one of the topics of discussion, and so I will try to follow up with that.  
And with respect to the first part of the question, press is being invited to that trip.  They’re traveling commercially.  There is a press logistics component to make sure that they can get everywhere, that they’re given access to everything.  There’s a press conference --
Q    You can possibly to go to all three of those cities commercially to cover him in the way that --
MR. SPICER:  The plane that the Secretary is taking doesn’t accommodate that, but they have made accommodations for members of the press to cover everything.  And I know that --
Q    Is that something you advised to him?
MR. SPICER:  No, we don’t get involved in the logistics for every Cabinet member’s trip.  I would advise you to touch base with the Secretary, with the State Department on this.  But I know that they have made aware of the concerns of some of your colleagues, and they are making accommodations in the future with respect to the size of the plane.
But make no mistake about it, there is a logistics component to make sure that the press is welcome throughout the trip and at every stop, and that accommodations are taken care of, and there’s logistical support to do that.  There will be a press conference component as well.
Q    Would you like, though, public diplomacy and this kind of important diplomatic initiative for this administration to be covered fully going forward?
MR. SPICER:  I think it will.  I hope it will be covered fully.
Q    And should they be -- reporters allowed to be on the place with the Secretary, as they have for many years?
MR. SPICER:  And I think that, when appropriate, they can.  And again, there’s a big difference between making sure that we carve out X number of seats and making sure that we have transparency and openness in covering events.  They have logistical support for you all, to make sure that you have hotels.  There’s travel support.  There’s accommodations and filing centers.  I mean, at some point, this isn’t about blocking anybody.  They’ve gone above and beyond.  Not every plane can accommodate every member of the press.
Q    You couldn’t get a bigger plane?
MR. SPICER:  It’s not a question -- there’s an element of tax --
Q    Most Secretaries of State can accommodate that.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  I understand that, and there’s an element of cost-savings at this point that the Secretary is trying to achieve.  But at the end of the day, there has been a press component to every stop of the Secretary’s trip.  He is doing everything he can to logistically support the press who wants to come and cover him, and they are being open to make sure that Secretary is available throughout the trip.
Q    President Trump has been -- was very critical of German Chancellor Merkel on the campaign trail.  I was just wondering, how does the White House think that will affect the tone of the meeting on Tuesday, and what type of tone does the President plan to take?
MR. SPICER:  I know that we did a bit of a readout earlier today on that.  There’s a lot of excitement on both sides of the ocean for this trip.  I know that we are looking forward to meeting with the Chancellor and her team, and I’ve talked to their folks over there and they’re very excited about coming over.  There’s a lot of trade and economic interests on both sides, and obviously there’s an element of national security that we share.  
And so I will let the trip’s -- look forward to the readout, but there is a lot of excitement coming.  And I think the President looks forward to meeting with the Chancellor and discussing areas of shared national interest with her.
Athena.
Q    Just following up on all of this Flynn discussion.  I gather from today and yesterday, correct me if I’m wrong, I want to make sure I understand the answer to this question.  Are you saying the President was not aware that Lieutenant General Michael Flynn was acting as a foreign agent when he appointed him to be national security advisor?
MR. SPICER:  Correct.  Well, and just remember, you wouldn’t know that until he filed.  He didn’t file until two days ago, so therefore, nobody would have known that because he hadn’t filed as a foreign agent until two days ago.
Q    My understanding is that he had filed a lobbying disclosure with Congress in November.
MR. SPICER:  Again, that’s different than filing a FARA request with the DOJ.
Q    And one more question --
MR. SPICER:  Well, it’s one-question Friday.  (Laughter.) 
Q    It’s very much attached to this.
MR. SPICER:  All right.
Q    The other question is, did Flynn disclose he was acting as a foreign agent in the security clearance review before he became NSA?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know the answer to that question.  That’s something that you should follow up with General Flynn on.  
April.
Q    Sean, I want to go back to the numbers.  When is it when a former President’s spillover ends and the new President stands on his own merit?  When does that happen?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think on January 20th at noon, you start to assume command of the government, and -- what specifically are you asking for? 
Q    The numbers from jobs.  You’re taking --
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that this is the first full month that encapsulates the President’s administration.  I think that’s a very telling number.  Look, and I get it.  These numbers are going to go up and down.  But I think for the first full month, we’re seeing the enthusiasm and spirit that so many business leaders have been drawn to, and that is exciting as a first month.  But I think this encapsulates a full 30 days of the Trump presidency, and so we’re going to continue to work forward with policies that will lower regulation and lower taxes, create a more business-friendly and entrepreneur-friendly business climate to allow the expansion of U.S. companies and grow U.S. jobs.
Q    And lastly, over the last couple of weeks we’ve heard all the negatives -- well, not all the negatives, but a large portion of negatives about the Affordable Care Act, and how you’re looking to make it patient care.  So with that, are there any positives which you could articulate from ACA that will carry into possibly patient care?
MR. SPICER:  I think children being able to stay on their plans to 26.  There’s a preexisting-condition piece.  But again, remember --
Q    That’s going to states, the way we understand it.  That’s subject to --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, but that -- you’re asking if there’s elements.  I think those are some things that -- and again, remember, there was some stuff that was part of the ACA that is stuff that Republicans had supported for a while as well.  I think this is making sure that this is the most effective and comprehensive healthcare policy that achieves the President’s goals.
Q    So those are the only two?  Those are two --
MR. SPICER:  Yes.  You asked -- I don't know, April, I’m sure I could go through the bill and get back.  It’s very long, as you saw the other day.  It’s a thousand-page --
Q    -- pages versus --
MR. SPICER:  Nine hundred seventy four pages.  Very good.
David Jackson.
Q    The Palestinians are saying that President Trump invited President Abbas to the White House for a meeting very soon.  Can you confirm that?
MR. SPICER:  I can.  Thank you guys very much.  Let’s end on a positive note.  Have a great weekend.  We look forward to seeing you.  Take care everybody.  Thank you.
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 3/13/2017, #22
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:20 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  How’s my pin, John?  
Q    It looks good.
MR. SPICER:  Good
Q    The tie is good, the pin is good.
MR. SPICER:  All right, then we’re ready to go.
Q    Ready to go.
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon, everyone.  I hope you all had a great weekend.  The President spent his weekend in a series of meetings with White House staff and advisors planning for a full and productive week.  
On Saturday, as many of you saw, the President had a working lunch with several members of his team, including Homeland Security Kelly, Treasury Secretary Mnuchin, Commerce Secretary Ross, Veterans Secretary Shulkin, and members of his White House staff, during which they discussed immigration reform and their efforts to repeal and replace Obamacare.
Over the weekend, the Vice President went down to Louisville, Kentucky.  He was joined by Governor Matt Bevin for a listening session with over a dozen small-business owners from Kentucky to discuss the burdens that Obamacare has inflicted on their businesses.  The Kentucky business owners shared in detail how Obamacare is negatively affecting their businesses, and reiterated their support for repealing our current healthcare system and replacing with one that actually works.
This morning, after receiving his intelligence briefing, the President led another listening session on healthcare with Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr. Tom Price.  The President and Secretary Price heard from nine concerned Americans from across the country who have been failed by the broken promises of Obamacare, as well as two doctors who have seen their patients suffer from the law’s misguided rules and requirements. 
This listening session was another important step in the process of crafting and implementing an effective patient-centered healthcare.  Americans have been watching their healthcare costs skyrocket while their choices of providers and insurers have dwindled for years.  
They’ve received those cancellations in the mail as many as three times.  They’ve seen urgent care and emergency rooms filled with people who can’t afford their high deductibles and resorted to enduring the pain or sickness until they had no choice but to go to a hospital.  They’ve had family members with chronic preexisting conditions whose cost of healthcare has more than doubled.  And they’ve been forced to let go of valued employees or, frankly, unable to hire more due to staggering workers' compensation increases. 
The President campaigned on a pledge to repeal and replace this unraveling system.  The American Health Care Act is one part of fulfilling this pledge; it’s far from the only one.  He’s using administrative action to provide essential regulatory relief to insurers, increasing coverage choices, and providing lower-premium options to individuals and families.
He will continue to work with Congress on the additional legislation, part of this three-prong strategy to increase choice while decreasing prices, including allowing health insurance to be sold across state lines, adding to the list of healthcare-related costs patients conduct with their health savings accounts, streamlining the process at the FDA so that lower-priced generic medicine gets to the market faster, inviting small business to band together to negotiate for lower health insurance for all their employees, and reforming the medical malpractice lawsuit system so that doctors are not forced to perform unnecessary and costly procedures and tests out of fear of future litigation.  
Our healthcare system is large, complex, and critically important not only to the health of our citizens, but to the health of our economy.  Through commonsense, patient-focused reforms, the President will work with Congress to create a new system that doesn’t impose a one-size-fits-all, government-knows-best vision on the American people.  We will empower the American people to make their own choices about healthcare that make them best work for themselves and their family, that will bring costs for everyone down.  
After the listening session, the President had lunch with Vice President Pence and Secretary of Transportation Chao.  Later this afternoon, the President will welcome all of his confirmed Cabinet members to the White House for their first Cabinet meeting.  This meeting is an important opportunity for the President to share his vision with the country with his Cabinet members, providing direction for them to bring back to their agencies and departments, to ensure that the entire administration is working towards the same goals.
Unfortunately, this afternoon, you’ll see some empty chairs around the table representing the President’s four nominees who have yet to be confirmed by the Senate -- Secretary of Agriculture-designee Governor Perdue, Secretary of Labor-designee Alex Acosta; Director of National Intelligence-designee, former Senator Coats, and United States Trade Representative-designee, Robert Lighthizer.  
Senate Democrats have drawn out this entire process for way too long, and these key agencies and departments will not be represented at the President’s first Cabinet meeting.  The President is confident in these unquestionable abilities of the confirmed Cabinet members that will be in attendance.  He is just as confident in the demonstrated quality of the four individuals who will not be able to attend.  Their absence will clearly be felt as this administration comes together for the first time to receive guidance from, and provide counsel to, the President on these unique areas of jurisdiction.
Following the Cabinet meeting, the President will sign an executive order to reorganize the federal government.  This order requires a thorough examination of every executive department and agency to identify money -- where money is being wasted and how services can be improved, and whether or not the programs are truly serving the American people.
This is the beginning of a long-overdue reorganization of the federal government and another significant step towards the President’s often-stated goal of making it more efficient, effective and accountable to the American people. 
This evening, the President will have dinner with Secretary of State Tillerson and National Security Advisor McMaster.  Also, he hopes to see Seema Verma confirmed as the administrator of Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, another unquestionably qualified nominee who’s been shamelessly prevented from taking her position at a critical post.
Let me just kind of touch on the week ahead.  Tomorrow, based on the current forecast, we are currently in conversations -- in contact with officials in the Chancellor’s office in Germany regarding the visit.  We’ll have an update regarding that visit later today.  
On Wednesday, the President will visit Detroit for a trip focusing on job creation and automobile manufacturing.  He will meet with auto executives and workers and manufacturing suppliers highlighting the need to eliminate burdensome regulations that needlessly hinder meaningful job growth.  Also on Wednesday, the President will visit Nashville, where he will lay a wreath at President Andrew Jackson’s tomb at the Hermitage.  
And as I told you last week, on Thursday the President will welcome the Taoiseach of Ireland for the traditional St. Patrick’s Day visit.  I can also confirm that the Deputy Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, Mohammad bin Salman, will have a meeting with the President on Thursday of this week.  I will have further details on that visit for you soon.
And on Friday, the President will travel to Mar-a-Lago for the weekend.
Finally, the President is aware of the forecast for the storm that’s currently threatening the Northeast.  The President has been briefed by his Homeland Security Advisor and the acting FEMA administrator on storm preparations.  He has directed his Intergovernmental Affairs staff to remain in contact with governors and mayors in the path of the storm.  He has directed his acting FEMA administrator to lean forward and be prepared to help states should they require federal assistance.
We urge everyone to listen to state and local leaders and public safety officials to follow their warning and closure notice.  They are the best source of information during that storm.
With that, I’d be glad to take your questions.
John.
Q    Sean, if I could come back to the U.S. attorney for the southern district of New York, Preet Bharara, who was asked to resign along with 45 other U.S. attorneys.  The President seemed to indicate not too long ago that he wanted Mr. Bharara to stay on in that job, and he was asked to resign like the other attorneys.  And then he says he was fired on Saturday when he refused to resign.  Did the President change his mind about keeping him on?  Or was it only supposed to be for a finite period of time?  Can you just fill us in? 
MR. SPICER:  I’m going to refer you to the Department of Justice on that.  This is a standard operating procedure for a new administration around this time to ask for the resignation of all the U.S. attorneys.  We had most of them -- or a good chunk of them had already submitted their resignation letter.  This is just the final swath of individuals who had not at this time.  But this is common practice of most administrations.
Q    I understand that this happened at the DOJ and the request was from the DOJ, but there seems to a White House connection vis-à-vis the fact that the President had actually asked him to stay on, and then the President apparently called him a couple of days before he was allegedly fired.  Can you tell us what that was all about?  And did the President change his mind?
MR. SPICER:  No, the President was calling to thank him for his service.  This is, as I said, a standard action that takes place at most administrations.  Then-Attorney General Reno sent out an almost identical letter in 1993.  The Bush administration sent out a similar one, as well.  So this is a very common practice for all political appointees -- not just in the Department of Justice -- but throughout government when there’s a turnover administration to ask for all individuals to do that.
Major. 
Q    Sean, yesterday John McCain said the President should either provide information about the allegation he put on Twitter a week ago Saturday, about his phones being tapped at Trump Tower, or retract his statement.  Today is the deadline.  What’s the President going to do?
MR. SPICER:  Well, let’s be clear -- the Department of Justice was asked to send information down to Congress.  It wasn’t the White House that was asked to do that.  Just so we're clear as far as what the request was.
Q    But the tweet came from the President of the United States.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And with the tweet -- 
Q    Does he have an obligation, as Senator McCain said, to clear this up?
MR. SPICER:  And I think if you look at the President’s tweet, he said very clearly “wiretapping” in quotes.  There’s been substantial discussion in several reports that Bret Baier from Fox on March 3rd talked about evidence of wiretapping.  There’s been reports in The New York Times and the BBC and other outlets about other aspects of surveillance that have occurred.
The President was very clear in his tweet that it was wiretapping, that that spans a whole host of surveillance types of options.  The House and the Senate intelligence committees will now look into that and provide a report back.  But I think that there has been numerous reports from a variety of outlets over the last couple months that seem to indicate that there has been different types of surveillance that occurred during the 2016 election.  
Q    And so what you’re saying is the President doesn’t have an obligation to provide any evidence?
MR. SPICER:  No, I’m not saying that at all.  Not at all.  What I’m saying is the request that was made from the House was to the Department of Justice.  I think that that’s an appropriate question to ask them. 
What I’m telling you is, from a White House perspective, there’s no question that there have been an abundance of reports regarding surveillance and other type of activities that occurred during the 2016 election.
Q    And that leads us to believe that the President’s only evidence are these reports?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, that leads you to believe that.  I’m saying to you --
Q    I'm trying to -- 
MR. SPICER:  And I’m saying to you is that what we made clear on that Sunday was that the House and Senate intelligence committees have the means, the process, and the access to go in and look at the entirety of the evidence that’s being presented to them and make a determination that they can report back to us.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Following up on Major’s question, does the President feel he has an obligation, once the investigation is over, to release some sort of statement in response to whatever the findings are?  That’s my first question.  I have a second one for you.  
MR. SPICER:  Well, let’s get there first.  I think to start to presume what the outcome is going to be before the House and the Senate look at all of the evidence and information and reports that are presented to them would be a bit presumptuous.  So I think -- let’s slow down a little, let them look at everything, and then let them make some determinations.
Q    And then my second question for you:  Has President Trump donated his paycheck from the month of February, like he promised to do during the campaign?
MR. SPICER:  The President’s intention right now is to donate his salary at the end of the year, and he has kindly asked that you all help determine where that goes.  The way that we can avoid scrutiny is to let the press corps determine where it should go.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Oh, we have a few ideas.
MR. SPICER:  In all seriousness, I think his view is he made a pledge to the American people, he wants to donate it to charity.  And he’d love your help to determine where it should go.
Q    May I suggest the Correspondents Association --
MR. SPICER:  That will be a great way --
Q    Journalism scholarship.
MR. SPICER:  That would be a great way to do it.  
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  I wanted to follow up with you on questions regarding Michael Flynn, who’s no longer in the administration.  There’s a five-year lobbying ban that’s been imposed upon all Trump administration employees.  Does that also apply to Michael Flynn?  Would he not be permitted to lobby now for five years because of the agreement that he signed when he became the national security advisor?
MR. SPICER:  That would be correct.  I’d have to check and actually figure out when he signed or if he signed the form.  But yes, all administration officials who come in are required to sign that ethics pledge banning them from lobbying for five years and then a lifetime ban on lobbying on behalf of any foreign government.
Q    And then related to that, what are the repercussions if an employee of this administration lobbies within five years?  Where's the teeth, what’s the penalty, what’s the punishment that would be imposed on that particular Trump administration employee?
MR. SPICER:  I’d have to get back to you, John.  I don’t know whether that’s a Department of Justice aspect or not, but I will get back.
Yeah.
Q    I was wondering, did the President ask Preet Bharara to stay on during their conversation during the transition or not?
MR. SPICER:  I was not privy to that conversation.  Again, I’m not really sure how it’s relevant at the end of the day.  The Department of Justice asked all remaining 46 at this time, that they asked for all of them to submit their letters of resignation based on the same kind of precedent that was set during both the Clinton and then the Bush administrations in terms of the timeline and format.  
Jessica. 
Q    I just wanted to ask about the reports about President Xi Jinping visiting Mar-a-Lago April 6th and 7th.  Can you confirm that visit and talk about what you want to accomplish with that type of less formal visit?  And secondly, with respect to that visit, you still don't have a confirmed ambassador, you don't have an assistant Secretary of State for East Asia Affairs. House ow does that affect your planning and ability to really properly brief the President and make sure he has a strong position?
MR. SPICER:  Planning is ongoing for a visit between President Trump and President Xi at a date to be determined.  We're not ready to confirm that, and we will have more details.  It's the purpose of this meeting, of that kind of a meeting, to help defuse tensions over North Korea and the recent deployment of a THAAD military battery to South Korea.  Any meeting between the President of the United States and the People’s Republic of China would necessarily cover a broad range of topics of mutual concern.
Secretary Tillerson is traveling to the region now.  So I think as we go forward we will have additional details on both the timing and the location of that when we go forward.
Q    Is the implication of you saying Tillerson is traveling that he's setting up the visit, Sean?
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry?
Q    Is the implication of you talking about Tillerson’s visit that he’s going to be laying the groundwork for --
MR. SPICER:  Well, he’s in the region.  I'm sure that in his visit to Japan, South Korea and then China that preparations will come up as well as areas of mutual concern.
Q    Sean, there's been a rash of --  
MR. SPICER:  What's that?
Q    Is it me?
MR. SPICER:  Sure.  Let’s go one at a time.
Q    There’s been a rash of attacks on LGBT community centers throughout the nation.  Over the weekend, the community center here in D.C., Casa Ruby, was attacked and a transgender staffer was assaulted.  This follows similar attacks that have taken place in recent days in Orlando, Florida, New Jersey and Oklahoma.  This is not unlike the anti-Semitism that the President has already denounced.  Will the President also denounce these attacks?
MR. SPICER:  Sure.  I mean, I think that -- I think one of the points that we've made in previous statements on this is that this is not the way that we as Americans solve our differences.  We don't attack each other.  We don't engage in this kind of behavior.  I think we have a First Amendment that allows us to express ourselves, and that's the appropriate way.  But doing it when you're threatening violence or destruction or vandalism is inappropriate in all of its forms.
Q    Is it connected to the withdrawal of the transgender guidance, do you think?
MR. SPICER:  Is it what?
Q    Is it at all connected --
MR. SPICER:  I don't believe there is any connection between -- I think that that would be a stretch, to say the least.
Yes, ma’am.
Q    Thanks for taking my question.  I wanted to ask about North Korea.  You mentioned North Korea.  Can you tell us a little bit about the review of North Korea right now and what direction you think the administration is going in terms of the relationship -- trying to manage the threat from North Korea?
MR. SPICER:  As I mentioned, Secretary Tillerson is heading to the region.  He'll meet with his counterparts in South Korea, Japan, and then ultimately in Beijing.  That's obviously going to be a major subject.  And as I mentioned, when we ultimately meet with President Xi and others, that will be a discussion; it's something that's he's talked about prior to the resignation of the last South Korean President, and was something that has been part of an ongoing discussion.
So there’s an internal review that we continue to have, but then there’s obviously a geopolitical conversation we're having with partners in the region as we look to contain North Korea’s military threat.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Can you confirm that any cooperation with Russia with regard to Syria is off the table?  And if not, is it fair to say that the forthcoming anti-ISIS plan does include some sort of cooperation with Russia?
MR. SPICER:  I'm not going to get into what the plan -- I mean, the plan is not done yet.  As I mentioned a couple days ago, Secretary Mattis was briefing the principals, and that plan is continuing to evolve.  So I'm not going to start to rule out one country.  But I think the President has been very clear in the past that if a country shares our commitment to defeating ISIS and we can work with them in an area of shared, mutual concern, then we will do so.
Q    Second question.  A Kremlin spokesperson said that Russian President Putin and President Trump will meet at the G-20.  Can you confirm that?  And would the White House move on a possibility of a meeting before that?
MR. SPICER:  I will follow up on that.  I don't have a date.  I know that the team is working very actively with respect to bilateral meetings at the G20.  I don't have anything for you on that. 
Roberta.
Q    Director Mulvaney said yesterday that he felt that the Obama administration had been manipulating the unemployment rate.  I'm wondering if that's a view that the President shares.  And what evidence is there of --
MR. SPICER:  I think he was clearly referring to Obamacare, the number of people.  But I would refer you back to him and his comments with respect to how he characterized that.  I think he can discuss the precise nature of what he meant on that.
Q    Does the President feel that the Obama administration had been manipulating --
MR. SPICER:  I think you know what the President’s view is. He’s made very clear in the past what his comments were on how those numbers were articulated in the past.  And I think there’s a question between the total number of people that are employed, and the President’s comments in the past have reflected that his big concern was getting to the bottom of how many people are working in this country, and that the denominator -- meaning the percentage rate of the total number of people -- is not the most accurate reflection of how many people are employed in this country.  How many jobs are created, how many people are getting back to work, how many companies are committing to hiring more people is a much more accurate assessment of where we're headed as our country -- where our employment is, where our economy is headed.
But to look at a number and say we have 4.7 or 4.8 or 5.9 percent unemployment is not necessarily an accurate reflection of how many people are actually working, seeking work, or want to work.  And if you know how they conduct those surveys, there’s a lot of times when people, whether they’re older or younger, or because of how long they’ve been searching for work, are not considered statistically viable anymore and they’re washed away.
So I think how you look at the percentage of people working can sometimes be a manipulated number.  The number of people that are added to the roll every year -- every month, rather -- is a much more accurate understanding of what’s happening in the economy.
Cecilia.
Q    I just want to clarify your answer to Major’s question. So will the DOJ and/or the administration comply with the deadline to supply information today?
MR. SPICER:  Remember, it's the -- again, it's not -- the request was made of the DOJ, and so the proper venue to ask that question of is the Department of Justice.
Q    But surely, the White House knows whether there is or there is not evidence.  
MR. SPICER:  You can't -- because, it's interesting, in the past whenever we've had these conversations with another agency, the accusation from the press corps is that we're interfering in something.  So you can't have it both ways.  You can't say that we're interfering with someone when we talk to them; when we don't talk to them, it's “surely you must know.”  So --
Q    So if the President tweets something --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, Cecilia is asking a question.
Q    -- and then say it's the Department Justice's obligation -- 
Q    This is to follow up on -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  I saw the tick-tock.  I understand it.  That doesn’t mean you get to jump in.
Cecilia.
Q    So to follow up on Major’s point, though, this is a tweet from the President.  Doesn’t the President have an obligation --
MR. SPICER:  And he does, and I think we've made it very --
Q    -- to make the evidence clear?
MR. SPICER:  Right, and we've made it very clear that we expect the House and the Senate Intelligence Committees to do their job.  I think there’s a preponderance of reports that continues to come out about surveillance and actions that have occurred during the 2016 election.  Once they come up with their report -- and it was asked earlier today -- I think we can talk about the conclusions of that report.  But at this time, you can't say that we're going to shift it off to the House and Senate and then comment every day.  That was the entire goal of asking them to look into this further.
Q    But will DOJ comply with this deadline today?  The clock is ticking.
  
Q    The President instructed them -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand.  My understanding is that they will.  But again, I would ask them what their intention is, and I believe there are certain things that they can and can't do in terms of classification and stuff.  But I would leave it up to the Department of Justice to answer for the Department of Justice.
Kaitlan.  
Q    How is the press making Obamacare look good?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think when you see some of these comparisons that occur in the -- talk about who’s going to win and who’s going to lose, it misses a lot of the competition that’s going to take place.  It doesn’t talk about the increased choice.
Right now, as the President has noted, as Secretary Price has noted, in a third of all counties in five states you have one choice.  Those analyses that are very -- trying to look at how much you’ll pay and how much you won’t, A, don’t take into consideration the competition that’s going to occur, the choice that’s going to occur.  
I mean, right now, you have one choice in a lot of places.  You have no decision about how much you’re going to pay and what you’re going to get.  Choice allows you to determine what scale of healthcare you need, what kind of package is good for you, your family or for your business.  And when you look at a lot of these analyses when you open up various major papers, they make it seem so simple:  it’s how much are you going to pay for on this plan, how much are you going to pay for under the current plan.  It misses an entirety of the whole process, which is that you don’t have competition, number one.
Number two, and the bigger point that I think the President and a lot of others are getting to, is that the system is failing on its own.  It makes it seem like it’s all rainbows and puppies.  At the end of the day, if you have a card and you’re getting a subsidy but you’re not getting care, you have nothing.
And so walking into a doctor’s office where you can hand them a card and say, I’ve got a $5,000 tax subsidy -- if that doctor doesn’t take the care or the deductible is so high, then you really don’t have anything.  And so to do an apples-to-apples comparison is hardly an accurate analysis of what the current situation is.
Zeke.
Q    Just going back to the counter-ISIS plan you mentioned earlier, the plan isn’t don’t yet.  The President during the campaign said multiple times that within 30 days he wanted that plan presented to him.  Obviously it’s undergoing comments at the National Security Council principals level.  But is the President upset that he hasn’t received it yet?  And does that point to a difference between campaigning and governing, that things take longer than he thought?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think there’s a difference.  The plan has been received, right.  The issue, as you correctly point out in your question, is that now that it becomes an aspect of the principals all discussing different priorities, different staffing levels, different funding levels.  But the plan is here, as we noted a few weeks ago.  It’s being reviewed, and they’re providing input from different members of the principals and different members of his national security apparatus to make sure that the plan continues to evolve and is able to attack ISIS in a way that --
Q    When is it actually going to take effect?
MR. SPICER:  Some pieces of it are, in the sense of -- he has talked to commanders on the ground.  We’ve noted before some of the military action that’s been taken, some of the authority that’s been given to some of the commanders on the ground.  That is actually taking the fight to ISIS on a daily basis.  I think the more holistic approach that he asked for will continue to evolve through the national security process.  But make no mistake, we’re on it right now.
Sharon.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  On the executive order this afternoon, do you have a numeric goal for either reducing the size of government or saving a certain amount of money through the review of agencies?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know that Director Mulvaney has a target, per se.  I think that’s part of the issue, is that you go through each one of these and you evaluate them on the merit of what they do or don’t do, or whether or not they’ve become bloated or duplicative, or, frankly, just outdated or in need of technological advances.
But there’s a lot of -- there’s no set number that we’re driving down to as we review government.  Sometimes you just walk into an agency and you realize that agency’s mission is no longer relevant, or that it’s duplicative in three other agencies, or that there are too many people performing a function that no longer exists for a variety of reasons.  But that’s why the mission is critical that Director Mulvaney was given the mandate to go out and get all of these different agencies and departments to review themselves and to provide feedback for him as to where we could go.
Gabi.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  You had said previously that the Republican healthcare plan wouldn’t be a one-size-fits-all approach, but the current plan preserves Obamacare’s health benefits requirements, which literally defines insurance at the federal level.  So how do you reconcile those two things?
MR. SPICER:  What’s missing right now is choice.  That’s the number-one issue.  We tried to solve a problem -- when I say “we,” the government -- with respect to Obamacare back in 2008, 2009.  And the issue was, is that in order to solve a problem for several million people being without healthcare insurance, we upended the system for everybody -- so if you had employer-based healthcare, if you had TRICARE, Medicare or Medicaid.  And it was exactly the opposite approach.  We went in to solve a problem that a small fraction of Americans had, and we upended the entire system, forcing premiums to go up and choice to go down for everybody.  
And I think that when you can institute choice and competition back in the system, that’s something that’s going to benefit everybody.  And that’s exactly the opposite of what’s happening.
Q    Would phase two or three of this eliminate those requirements?
MR. SPICER:  I think phase two, the administrative phase, will look at a lot of those requirements, and then phase three -- and again, they’re not necessarily -- they can run concurrently, and I think the House is looking at starting a lot of that legislation. 
And so -- and Dr. Price is already starting to look through a lot of that administration -- a lot of administrative aspects of it as well at HHS and figure out how do we start to achieve some of this, unravel some of these pieces that are there, but instilling choice and competition, allowing people to buy their insurance over state lines, allowing small businesses to pool, allowing the expansion of health savings accounts -- all of those kind of factors that are going to drive down costs, but also having the insurance companies, frankly, be able to offer additional choices and options for people is in itself going to be a huge bonus.
Charlie.
Q    A lot of conservatives are complaining that -- or suggesting that the President doesn’t fully back the Paul Ryan healthcare plan.  Has the President spoken with Paul Ryan about the plan?  And have they had any conversations about its future in Congress?
MR. SPICER:  They have spoken, yes.  I don’t know when the last time they have.  But the President is fully committed to this plan.  I think you saw Secretary Price and Director Mulvaney out discussing that this weekend.  They’re committed to the plan.
And, look, Director Mulvaney made it very clear this weekend as well that if through the process we can find some ideas that make this a stronger, more patient-centered piece of legislation that will ultimately benefit Americans, then we’re going to do it.  We’re not saying this is the only way forward.  As it works its way through the House and then ultimately through the Senate, if there are ways that we can enhance the bill through the legislative process, we’re willing to do that.
Peter.
Q    You want to read us another -- quickly -- if there's any details of the -- 
MR. SPICER:  Would you like to know?  (Laughter.) 
Q    Yes.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, thank you.  The President spoke to the Chancellor of Germany.  They agreed, due to the current weather, that the meeting should be postponed.  The meeting has been rescheduled to March 17th, this Friday.  Same schedule of events on March 17th.  
Q    All right, I’ll ask my question if I can very quickly then.  
MR. SPICER:  Thank you for your assistance with the --
Q    That’s news.  You spoke on behalf of the President, quoting him on the jobs report on Friday.  You said they “may have been phony in the past, but it’s very real now.”  
MR. SPICER:  They are very real now.
Q    “They are very real now."
MR. SPICER:  Just want to make sure you get it right.  
Q    The question I wanted -- when should Americans trust the President?  Should they trust the President -- is it phony or real when he says that President Obama was wiretapping him?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, let’s get back.  I think there’s two things that are important about what he said.  I think recognizing that it’s -- he doesn’t really think that President Obama went up and tapped his phone personally.
Q    What does he think?
MR. SPICER:  But I think there’s no question that the Obama administration, that there were actions about surveillance and other activities that occurred in the 2016 election.  That is a widely reported activity that occurred back then.  The President used the word “wiretap” to mean, broadly, surveillance and other activities during that.  And that is, again, something -- it is interesting how many news outlets reported that this activity was taking place during the 2016 election cycle, and now we’re wondering where the proof is.  It is many of the same outlets in this room that talked about the activities that were going on back then.
Q    So on the same topic, on the CBO report, did the President think it was real then, and is phony now?
MR. SPICER:  What CBO report?
Q    On the expectation -- the CBO report is coming out, about which you said, “If you’re looking at the CBO for accuracy, you’re looking in the wrong place.”  Three years ago, you said of the CBO report, that it confirms Obamacare is bad for the economy.  So the question is --
MR. SPICER:  Well, it was bad for the economy.
Q    Okay, so the bottom line of the question is, was it real then, and now is now phony?  As you have said, it’s not the place to find accuracy?
MR. SPICER:  Okay, so let’s look at the CBO’s projection.  It said their projection on Obamacare was that, in 2016, it would have 24 million people on it.  The actual figure is 10.4 million people -- less than half the number of people that it predicted would be insured were on it, and it’s declining.
So the only point, Peter, is to make sure that people understand -- if you’re looking to get a bullseye accurate prediction as to where it’s going, the CBO was off by more than half last time.  So it’s not -- this is not about what my understanding or my belief of the CBO is.  The last time they did this they were wildly off, and the number keeps declining.  
And so the question that needs to get asked right now, or, frankly, the awareness that needs to be brought up right now is that if you were going to look at a number tonight, I think you have to look through the scope of whether or not that number is.
Now, it was bad for the economy.  That was right.  You can glean that in terms of the direction what the impact that it had.  But as far as their numbers go -- on the number of people that they predicted back then would be covered now -- they were off by more than half.
Q    I guess the question is, when can we trust the President when he says something is phony and when he says it’s real?
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, hold on.  You asked a question about CBO, and now you’re conflating it with the question of the President.  The question is --
Q    No, I asked a question about wiretapping first.  And then we went on to CBO.  So the question, in simple terms is, when he says something, can we trust that it’s real --
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    -- or should we assume that it’s phony?  Well, no, no --
MR. SPICER:  You suggest that it’s real, absolutely.
Q    How can we believe that it’s real when you just told us that it was phony then, but now it’s real?
MR. SPICER:  I did not tell you that, Peter.  And you’re trying --
Q    You told us on Friday that the President said -- the President, you didn’t -- the President said the numbers were phony then but they’re very real now.  So how can we take anything he says that he won’t later say, "actually it was the opposite"?
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, hold on.  I think the difference is, the President was talking then and now about job creation -- the number of jobs.  The issue that he brought up in the quote that you’re talking about was the percentage of people who are unemployed.  And there is no question that no matter how you look at this, whether you talk about 4.7 or 4.8 or whatever the number is, that number fluctuates by how people calculate who is in the workforce.
Q    He said it was in the twenties or more.  
MR. SPICER:  Okay, Peter, let me answer the question.
Q    I’m listening.
MR. SPICER:  You’re not.  Let me answer it.  The bottom line is, the percentage of people who are unemployed varies widely by who you’re asking and the way you do the analysis of who is actually in the workforce.  The number of people who are working and receiving a paycheck is a number that we can look at.
Secondly, when you’re asking about the validity of the CBO report, again, I would refer you to the CBO itself.  The number that they issued that would be insured in 2016 was 26 million people.  The actual number is 10 -- excuse me, 24 million.  The actual number is 10.4.  That’s not a question of our credibility.  It’s a question of theirs.
Do you have anything more?  (Laughter.) 
Q    The bottom line is, the question that you still have not answered is --
MR. SPICER:  I have answered it.
Q    -- can you say affirmatively that whenever the President says something, we can trust it to be real?
MR. SPICER:  If he’s not joking, of course.  But in that case --
Q    So let's start over again with joking.
MR. SPICER:  But you're asking -- hold on -- okay, no, no.  But your point is -- I mean, every time that he speaks authoritatively -- that he speaks -- that he is speaking as President of the United States.  Like it’s --
Q    Three to five -- more than 3 million Americans voted illegally -- was that, when he was speaking -- 
MR. SPICER:  Yes.  And he still believes that.
Q    -- was he joking or does he believe it?
MR. SPICER:  He does believe it.  Thank you.
Julie.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  I have a healthcare question.  But first, can we just get an answer one way or the other about whether the President directed the Department of Justice to respond to this?
MR. SPICER:  No, he did not.
Q    And does he plan to?
MR. SPICER:  I answered the question.
Q    Okay, so on healthcare, Secretary Price said on Sunday that nobody will be worse off financially and more people will be covered than are currently with the plan that you guys are pushing.  Paul Ryan acknowledged that people are going to lose coverage.  So what is the goal here?  You just said you’re open to modifications to the plan if you find that there’s a better way to do it.  Is the goal that people not lose coverage?  Or is the goal that --
MR. SPICER:  Well, again -- but there’s a false argument there which is that they have coverage.  People have cards, they’ve been told they have things, but they can’t -- they keep walking in -- the President met with nine individuals this morning that they were told they’re going to get coverage for something, they are told that they’re going to have all these subsidies.  They walk in, and they don’t get covered.  They don’t have the care that they need.  There is a difference between walking around with someone and saying, hey, I’ve got a card, than I have care.  And that is a big, big difference.  
Right now, when you have a third of the counties in this country that have one choice and going down, and number of insurers leaving markets, then the system is collapsing.  So the question has to be, to everybody who is not with us on this, is what is your alternative?  Because right now, the current system of Obamacare is failing every American who has Obamacare.  And frankly, for those who don’t have Obamacare, for those who have employer-based insurance, for those who have TRICARE or Medicare, it’s driving up the costs.  And in the cases, especially for those who have Medicaid, Medicare, or TRICEARE, they’re going into doctors’ offices more and more who are telling them, we don’t accept that.
Q    But you’re talking about quality and about cost.  I’m asking about coverage.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, but that’s the point, is that you’re missing the point.  If you keep talking about coverage -- care is what matters.  If you can’t walk in and get seen, if you can’t get a doctor to see you, then you don’t have coverage.  I mean, that’s what this is all about.  Being told you have coverage but you can’t go see a doctor, or you can’t afford to see a doctor is not coverage.
John Gizzi.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you, Sean.  I have two questions.  First, Democratic Leader Pelosi said on Friday that every single Democrat would vote against the American healthcare plan -- the plan backed by Republican members of Congress and the administration.  The Freedom Caucus in the House has come out for Senator Paul’s plan.  When one simply does the arithmetic of Democratic members and Freedom Caucus members, that’s a majority against the plan.  How does the administration plan to overcome the arithmetic?
MR. SPICER:  We're going to continue to work with members of the House and then eventually the Senate.  I feel very good, as the President continues to engage with members, that we will have the votes necessary.  I think Speaker Ryan agrees with that as well.  We're going to have the votes, this thing will pass, and we'll move on to the Senate.
Q    The other question is this:  In recent weeks there’s been considerable attention on the upcoming elections in the Netherlands on Wednesday, and in France in a few weeks.  Candidate Geert Wilders of the Netherlands was here for the CPAC conference.  Representatives of Marine Le Pen of France were here.  Many analogies were made between these candidates and President Trump, and they offered words of praise for him or did so through their representatives.  Is he aware of these candidates in Europe who invoke his name and image?  And if so, what does he think of these would-be Trumps and Trumpettes?
MR. SPICER:  I don't know the answer to that.  I think most of these are -- we'll allow sovereign nations to have their own elections without interference.
Alexis.
Q    Sean, can I follow up on Peter and Julie's questions?
MR. SPICER:  Sure.
Q    Two issues, again.  Whether the President and Director Mulvaney put a lot of faith in the Congressional Budget Office, members of the Senate will, when they get -- if they get legislation from the House.  So my question is, what does the President or the administration intend to do to establish to senators’ satisfaction that the numbers coming out of the Congressional Budget Office, which the President will question, are not substantial and can be countered by other information?  In other words, is OMB doing its own kind of score?  Is the President relying on a think tank to counter the messaging?  Because senators are already indicating that they will put weight in the CBO’s score.
MR. SPICER:  And again, I think this is part of an ongoing discussion with members as far as philosophical, what do they believe, and a lot of these aspects of this plan in keeping with what they have supported in the past.
Obviously, they’re going to look at the score -- I get it.  That's part of it.  And there are pieces of it that may historically have more weighted than others.  But I think this is going to be -- as I mentioned to John, I mean, it's an ongoing conversation with members of the House and ultimately the Senate with respect to whatever comes out.
But in the same way that members relied on the score last time, they were way off.  And I think that we have to remind them that if this is what you're basing your vote on, you have to look at the historical context in which that information was provided. I think that's an important aspect to how they do it.  But I think there’s going to be a ton of factors that people rely on as they do this.
Q    Can I follow -- I have one follow-up.
MR. SPICER:  Of course. 
Q    I may be confused about the wiretapping, your answers, in terms of the President’s response.  The President was the one who tweeted this, right, and said that he learned something.  So can you just establish for me, because I'm confused, the President did discuss what it is that he had in mind, what he tweeted, with the Department of Justice before the Department 00
MR. SPICER:  No, I'm not going to get into what the President knew or didn’t know prior to it.  I think we've already commented on this multiple times.
Q    But how would the Department of Justice have any idea --
MR. SPICER:  I don't know.  This was a request made of the House Intelligence Committee, not to us.  So I don't want to get into starting to parse what we knew or what we didn’t.  That request did not come to us, it went to the Department of Justice.
Yes.
Q    Congressman Steve King (inaudible) a tweet he put up, saying that, "We can’t restore civilization with somebody else's babies."  Does the White House have any reaction to that?
MR. SPICER:  I will definitely touch base with the President on that and get back to you on that.
Hallie.
Q    Sean, two for you.  I just want to go back to something.  You just said a minute ago that "what the President meant when he tweeted about the wiretapping was" -- and you sort of explained it.  But you’ve also stood at that podium and said the tweet speaks for itself.  When do you decide when a President’s tweets, when his words are open to interpretation and when those words stand on their own?
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry, can you further explain what you're asking?  I mean, his tweets do speak for themselves.
Q    You just sort of interpreted it for Peter, saying, well, he didn’t mean that President Obama had -- 
MR. SPICER:  That's not what I said.  No, no, actually --
Q    You said when he meant wiretapping -- said it -- he meant surveillance.  That's not what he said. 
MR. SPICER:  He literally had it in quotes.
Q    So you're interpreting the tweet for us, it sounds like.
MR. SPICER:  No, in some cases I'll ask him, what did the quotes mean, and he'll say --
Q    Did you ask about this tweet?
MR. SPICER:  I did.
Q    And what did he say?
MR. SPICER:  He said they were in quotes, I was referring to surveillance overall.  It's something that had been referred to in other reports.  
Q    So he cited other reports in his conversation with you?
MR. SPICER:  He did, yes.
Q    So was that what he was basing that tweet on?
MR. SPICER:  As I just mentioned -- it was a good try, but I've already been clear on that.
Q    I have a second for you, Sean.  I want to go back to this healthcare idea.  Just yes or no:  Are CBO numbers legitimate, or not?
MR. SPICER:  That's not my determination to make.  I'm telling -- 
Q    Does the President think those numbers are legitimate?
MR. SPICER:  Hallie, it depends.  There are a lot of things at -- hold on, Hallie.  You guys have like an NBC thing.  Let me answer the question.  I think when you look at whatever that number is, whether it's budget projections or whatever, I think there’s a track record that goes along a lot of times with whether or not the projections in certain areas -- whether it's unemployment, budgetary numbers, whatever -- what the track record is.
All I'm suggesting to you is very clearly that the numbers that they gave the last time they did health care were off by more than 50 percent when it came to the number of people insured.  That's not my interpretation, that's a fact.  And I think it's important for people to understand the differences.
Eamon.
Q    Sean, on Preet Bharara, I guess there are two possibilities here.  One is the President made a commitment to keep him back in November, and the other one is that he didn’t.  Preet Bharara came down to the lobby of Trump Tower and said that the President had made that commitment.  Did the President, in fact, make that commitment to Preet Bharara?
MR. SPICER:  I don't think it really matters.  At the end of the day, the Attorney General followed a practice that existed for the last several administrations and asked every attorney general in the last administration to submit their resignation.  So, I mean, it is --
Q    It matters in ongoing investigations, and it also matters in the sense that the President made a commitment.  If he made a commitment, why did he change his mind?  Why did he go back on it?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, as I mentioned earlier, he called him to thank him for his service last week.  He followed in the past practice of last several administration and asked everybody to step down.  And I think that's the appropriate thing.  
Q    Sean, but what’s changed from November to now?
MR. SPICER:  I called on someone.
Q    Sean, thank you.  Ronica Cleary from Fox 5, thank you.  I have two questions.  The first, I think especially in light of what has happened in the room here today, the President tweeted this morning that much of the media is being rude and that we should be nice.  So my question is, is it our job to be nice?  And do you think we're nice?  (Laughter.)   
MR. SPICER:   Thank you, Ronica.  I will just leave it at this.  I think that I've been asked for my personal opinion several times.  That's not my job.  I don't get up here to speak for myself.  I speak for the President.  I think that he has been very clear that he doesn’t believe some of the behavior and the reporting has been appropriate.  And to Hallie’s point, I will let the tweet speak for itself.
Ronica, number two.
Q    Second question.  But this is about you.  The interaction you had at the Apple store this weekend -- what would be, I guess, your message to individuals who want to maybe -- I see that woman was, you could argue, very aggressive.  If somebody doesn’t want to be aggressive and has a question for you, what would you be your kind of message to a regular citizen that has an issue?
MR. SPICER:  Ask it.  I interact with individuals all day long.  Ninety-nine percent of them are pleasant, even with people who may not agree with our philosophy or programs or whatever.  But it's a free country, and the beauty of it is that people can act how they want, no matter how that's interpreted.  And as long as they stay on the right side of the First Amendment, we're good.
Francesca.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  You said that when the President said wiretapping in that tweet he meant a whole host of surveillance types.  So that we can be crystal clear, what surveillance types was he referring to then?  What would you consider part of that range?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean, I think there’s a whole host of tactics that can be used to monitor somebody -- either through wiretap or other ways in which you can surveil somebody.
Q    We took that to mean monitoring his calls, specifically.  So what else would you include in that range?
MR. SPICER:  I think there’s a whole host of things that fall into that category.  So I'm not sure how you took it, but there is a wide range of ways in which somebody can be monitored or followed up on.  And I think that if you contacted one of the law enforcement agencies, they will provide you with a whole host of ways.
Thank you, all.  Be safe tomorrow with the snow.  Thank you very much.  Take care.  Stay safe.  
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 3/14/2017, #23
James S. Brady Briefing Room
2:13 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  Looks like the snow didn’t keep anyone away.  Good afternoon.  I hope -- I'm glad to see everyone made it safely in.  
As you may have seen last night, the President met with D.C. Mayor Bowser and Metro general manager Wiedefeld about the preparations for the storm.  The President continues to closely monitor the impact of the storm throughout the Northeast.  The White House Office of Intergovernmental Affairs has been in touch with state and local officials in the path of the storm to provide them guidance and support.  As the storm continues to track the East Coast, heavy to intense snow, sleet, and strong winds could result in significant travel impacts and possible coastal flooding.  
Again, the President encourages everyone to listen to their state and local leaders and public safety officers, and follow their warnings and closure notices.  They are working around the clock to ensure the safety of our citizens and their families.
In light of the storm, the schedule for today changed a bit.  Obviously, German Chancellor Merkel's visit was moved to Friday.  We'll continue to provide you updates on the schedule as we grow closer to Friday.
Today, the President had lunch with the Deputy Crown Prince and Minister of Defense of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  This afternoon, the President will swear in Seema Verma as the Administrator of Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.  The President looks forward to having the spectacularly qualified and experienced Administrator Verma finally onboard, especially as we continue to lay the groundwork for historic reform of our healthcare system.
Later this afternoon, the President and Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr. Tom Price, will have a call with the CEO of Anthem Healthcare, Mr. Joseph Swedish.  He will then have a phone call with Speaker Ryan and Majority Leader McCarthy to further discuss the Republican plan to repeal and replace Obamacare with the American Health Care Act and a series of much-needed regulatory reforms to accompany that.
The President was glad to see the National Federation of Independent Businesses announce their support for the American Health Care Act, and FIB has previously identified healthcare along with small business taxes as their two biggest priorities, and the President's healthcare agenda will address many of their concerns for small businesses.  
Yesterday, of course, the Congressional Budget Office released their report on the American Health Care Act.  I know that there have been significant concerns about the CBO report, and I want to give a little bit of context to the numbers that have been going around. 
In 2013, the CBO estimated that 24 million people would have coverage under Obamacare in 2016.  They were way off.  They were off by 13 million people -- over 50 percent.  In fact, only 10.4 million people were actually covered.  Reports now suggest that that number has dwindled down to 9 million.  CBO coverage estimates are consistently wrong and, more importantly, did not take into consideration the comprehensive nature of the three-pronged plan to repeal and replace Obamacare with the American Health Care Act.
We're working to bring real relief and better choices to the American family.  The two other prongs of our plan contain several additional reforms that will further drive down cost and increase coverage.  When you get down to it, the Congressional Budget Office is there to measure the potential impact of programs on the federal budget.  Its attempts to estimate coverage have been historically faulty.  But in the portion of its analysis that focuses on what the office is really about, the CBO concedes that the American Health Care Act would actually reduce the deficit by over $330 billion and bring health insurance premiums down 10 percent, even before many of the significant reforms in prongs two and three have taken effect.  
And as I've mentioned before, some of these include expanding healthcare savings accounts, streamlining the process at FDA so that innovative and lower-cost medicines can get to patients faster, allowing health insurance to be sold across state lines, which increases competition and decreases cost, permitting small businesses to band together to negotiate healthcare rates for all of their employees, and reforming the medical malpractice system so that doctors aren’t spending their time and patients' money on unnecessary procedures. 
Beyond the numbers, let's talk about some real-life examples of the cost of Obamacare for some actual Americans who the President heard from during his listening session yesterday.  Kim Sertich, a small-business owner in Arizona, had her healthcare cost skyrocket from $389.79 a month to $809.15.  Carrie Couey from Colorado, a mother of six whose youngest son is autistic, saw her family's yearly insurance go from $1,700* [$17,000] to $52,000 for a lower-quality plan.  And Joel Brown, a farmer from Tennessee, saw his catastrophic coverage cost spike in the wake of Obamacare from $119 a month to more than $500 per month.  
These are the stories that really matter to millions of Americans who are suffering under Obamacare, and these are the stories that are at the top of the President's mind as he works towards reforming our healthcare system.  The President is committed to working together with Speaker Ryan, Majority Leader McCarthy, and Majority Leader McConnell to create a system that's affordable and accessible to all Americans.  
Let me walk through the rest of the schedule for the week.  Tomorrow, the President is headed to Michigan to meet with auto executives and workers, and will discuss how his plans for rolling back federal red tape will lead to more American jobs and higher wages, specifically in the automobile sector.  It's a great opportunity for the President to showcase moves he's already made towards these ambitious "Buy American, Hire American" agenda, like encouraging investment and workforce training and developments so that Americans are ready for the jobs of the future, and removing the roadblocks that prevent American businesses from staying and expanding here in the United States.  
The President hopes to build on the great optimism that he's built within the business community in anticipation of the renewed opportunities the President's economic agenda has already created.  He and his team are hard at work to produce the results that the American people deserve and voted for last year.  
He will also travel to Nashville, Tennessee, where he will lay a wreath at President Andrew Jackson's tomb on his 250th birthday.   
Thursday, the Taoiseach of Ireland Kenny will come to the White House for the traditional St. Patrick's Day visit, including a reception in honor of the Taoiseach and Mrs. Kenny.  And as I mentioned, German Chancellor Merkel's visit will resume on Friday, and we will have an update on that schedule.
With that, I'm glad to take a few questions.
Q    Sean, President Trump has said that under his plan there will be insurance for everybody.  How do you square that with the CBO numbers?  And is that a promise he can really keep?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think there's two issues that are important to note on that, Katherine.  Number one, more and more Americans have no choices, so they don't have insurance.  I've mentioned this before.  Having a card and having coverage that when you walk into a doctor’s office has a deductible of $15,000, $20,000 a year isn't coverage.  That's a card.  That doesn’t get you the care you need.  That doesn’t allow you to get the procedure or the referral that you need from a doctor that's telling you what you need to have happen.
That's vastly different than what we hope to exist, which is giving people who don't have it -- and let’s kind of -- I think it's important to add some context to this.  If you think about the individual market that exists right now, the individual insurance market, you’ve got roughly 30 million people that exist right now -- 9 million people now are on the exchange.  That number has gone down; 6.5 million people have said they don't want any insurance and they’re going to pay a penalty, and then just under 14 million people have said that they have applied for a hardship.  So you’ve got almost 20 million people in America who have said that they don't want Obamacare and they’ll either pay a penalty or will apply for a hardship.
Those are people who don't have it to begin with.  The exchanges sought out to cover these people, and we're finding out that you’ve got 9 million-plus who are getting it right now.  They have no coverage.  And for more and more Americans, they’re losing their coverage, their choices are gone.  Tax credits in competition that will come in phases two and three in the prongs that we talked about will further drop prices down, will further increase competition.
The CBO score didn’t take into consideration in that.  And again, if you look at their numbers, you’ve got roughly just over 9 million people on the exchanges.  The CBO number says that 14 million people in the first year alone will lose coverage.  It doesn’t take a ton of analysis to recognize that that doesn’t make any sense logically.  You can't only have 9-plus million people on the exchange and say in the first year alone, when there’s no touch to Medicaid or anything else, you're just removing the individual mandate that forced people to buy something that they didn’t want in the first place, that is going to lead to 14 million people -- that people are going to drop off Medicare, they’re not going to take their employer -- that just doesn’t add up.  
In fact, I would argue that if you look at the other part of the equation, the 20 million-plus people who have either chosen to pay a penalty -- you think about that -- the 6.5 million people are saying either the plan is too costly, the plan doesn’t provide coverage.  I think a lot of those people, especially when we continue to instill additional coverage, they have more choices, they can pick a plan that actually fits their needs or fits their budget, you're going to see more people want coverage who are going to choose coverage.  
So I think that the CBO number, A, they have a record that doesn’t match up with the ability to count people.  They’re pretty good at dollars, not as good at people.  And I think that when you look at the additional phases or prongs of this whole comprehensive approach, that actually changes the equation a lot.  It’s looking at one piece of a three-part plan, and that's not the entirety of the plan that we're looking at.  So that doesn’t --
Q    So what does the White House think the change will be next year?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, I don't think that we -- we don't do those projections.  But I think that there’s no question, when you look at the cost, they’re already saying just this alone, just doing the first prong of this will take costs down 10 percent in the individual market.  If you think about it, they’re up 25 percent in the individual market on average already.  This year alone, on just people who are on the exchanges, up 25 percent.  The CBO is saying, just with what we're doing on the first prong alone, 10 percent decline in the individual market.  That's a significant reduction.
That's what we're talking about.  Bringing costs down, it increases choices.  That's a big deal right now.  The problem that you have currently is that these subsidies that people get get them a card that doesn’t get them care.  And that's what we need to start focusing on, is how many people are actually getting the care they need to deal with the medical concerns of them or their family.  And that's not what’s happening.
Mike.
Q    Sean, stating as you did that the primary objection of this White House is that the CBO report doesn’t take into account phase two and phase three, are there specifics either in terms of the specific regulatory reforms that the White House is considering and the specific terms of the legislation that you would offer that are out there for people to study as part of this?  Because as you surely know, Tom Cotton among others are skeptical of whether these phases can actually -- 
MR. SPICER:  Look, the things that I mentioned earlier -- allowing people to buy across state lines, to pool their insurance, to expand HSAs, to reform the FDA -- all of those things I think unquestionably add competition and choice.  There’s no question about it.  If one plan can sell that was in Maryland, into Virginia, where they can seek additional customers, that competition alone invariably brings down costs.  And we've seen this in market after market where once you allow competition, by itself, that will bring down costs.  It will bring in choice.
Right now these insurance who have been mandated by the government to create certain packages that people don't need, you’ve got young people that are being told to buy packages that have end-of-life care that they don't necessarily need.  You’ve got people who are in their older phases having to buy stuff for maternity that may not be a service that they need at their stage of life.  But the problem is that the government got involved in health care and started dictating what needed to happen instead of allowing the choice and allow people to buy a plan that actually was tailored to the needs that they want.
Those reforms in themselves unquestionably bring down cost.  There’s no question.  But I think one of the issues that has to go back to overriding this issue -- and the President has stated this on numerous occasions -- if we do nothing, if we just allow this to continue, it will collapse on its own.  The cost of it is unsustainable.  The premiums are going sky-high in state after state.  And the choices keep going further and further down.
And so this idea of comparing it to Obamacare is a false choice because they have no choice.  The choice is going away and the cost continues to get higher through every phase.  And so to assume that the comparison is apples to apples is a false choice.  
Q    I'm not making that.  But you’ve been critical from this podium of the Obama administration, of Democrats, in the way they went about passing the Affordable Care Act.  In the interest of transparency that you accused them of not following, of shoving it down people’s throat, shouldn’t the White House, should HHS put those details out now?  Should they put the legislative details out and the subsequent steps in phase three?
MR. SPICER:  I think the House is working on that in a lot of cases.  And as that legislation gets done --
Q    -- put the cards on the table now, because there's a lot of skepticism -- 
MR. SPICER:  I think that's a great question for Speaker Ryan, and I know that he’s been working with a team in getting it done.  And I think the sooner that we can get all those prongs out there, the better.  I agree with you.  But I think the big difference, just so we're clear, is that we posted this bill online, the Speaker had it out there, the President tweeted it out.  Anyone in the country and anyone in the world, could read it.  That's a vastly different approach than after it's being done, told, after we pass it you can read it, which is what Speaker Pelosi said.
Q    Does the White House encourage Republicans to put details of the phase three legislation out there now?
MR. SPICER:  I mean, sure.  The more that can get out there on those phases, absolutely.  And I know the Speaker is working with his members to do that.  But I think that's an appropriate question for the Speaker to answer, not for me.  I know that we are trying to work with them.  I know that there’s a lot of members that are working with Speaker Ryan and Leader McCarthy and, frankly, on the other chamber as well.  But I think that we continue -- and that's why I think we're talking about all of those prongs and all the pieces of them so that we can start making sure that people understand the comprehensive nature of this.
Q    Will that happen before there’s a vote on the -- 
MR. SPICER:  I think that's a question for Speaker Ryan to answer.  I think the more we can get out there the better, though.
Alexis.
Q    Can I follow up on what Mike was asking about Senator Cotton?  Why is the White House giving Senator Cotton full running room to go again and again in the media and to denigrate the House plan without bringing him in, discussing with him what Mike was just bringing up -- alternatives that he’s suggesting?  Why does he have special dispensation to go out?
MR. SPICER:  I don't think he has special dispensation.  It's a free country; he can say what he wants.
Q    But if you brought him in here --
MR. SPICER:  No, I think our team has been working with his team as they are with Senator Paul’s team and anyone else who has ideas.  We've been engaged in a very, very robust discussion with members in both chambers who have ideas to move this thing forward.  I don't think we are able to tell people what they can and cannot engage in a free society.  And Senator Cotton is obviously able to make any comments that he’d like.  We’d obviously continue to like to work with him.  And I think the team will continue to reach out to both he and his team to try to get his ideas on this.
Q    But the President spent time talking to him about his ideas on immigration.  Has he called him?  Has the Vice President called Senator Cotton?
MR. SPICER:  I know that we've had a very, very robust discussion with members of the House and Senate.  I would have to get specific details of what we've done with specifically Senator Cotton.
Q    Is Senator Cruz coming today?
MR. SPICER:  I believe he -- I'd have to check on that.  I know that there was a group of individuals.  I don't have that list in front of me.
Q    Senators?
MR. SPICER:  I will get back to you on that, Alexis, I promise.  The snowstorm kind of shifted a bunch of stuff up, so I don't want to start getting in front of who actually can be here and who can't.  But I will make sure that we get those details out and we have --
Q    Can you get it to the pool?
MR. SPICER:  I'd be glad to get it to the entire pool.
Q    Thank you.
MR. SPICER:  Margaret.
Q    Thank you.  So still on the same subject.  Does the White House support the House bill as it is, or amending it?  And there’s been reporting that the White House is involved, or some White House officials are involved in shaping what's being  described as like a major or significant manager’s amendment in conjunction with conservatives.  Can you tell --
MR. SPICER:  I would -- I'm sorry, please finish.  
Q    No, we can go back and forth.  But I'm just wondering, can you -- is the White House writing this amendment or just considering backing the amendment?  And does Paul Ryan know about it?  We can tell him about it right now, I guess. 
MR. SPICER:  I think Speaker Ryan is well aware of the manager’s amendment.  I think as we've noted multiple times from the podium, when people have ideas that are constructive or supportive, or ones that we have heard about from different members that we have engaged with, and, frankly, ones that the House and Senate has engaged with who shared ideas, we’ve always stated a willingness.  Director Mulvaney has talked about it, Secretary Price, the President himself, the Vice President.
Part of the reason we're engaging with these individuals is to hear their ideas, to talk to them about not just the content but the approach -- what can go in, what can go out, how we deal with the different phases, as Mike was asking, and when we go.  
But all of that is part of a comprehensive strategy to engage with members who support us, who have ideas and want to be onboard, who want to be constructive in the process and achieve the President’s goal of having a patient-centric healthcare system. 
So we are obviously in talks with House leadership about the contents.  But as I mentioned, the President will be on the phone with Speaker Ryan and Leader McCarthy later this afternoon to talk to them about some of these ideas and some of the path forward.  But that's part of the legislative process.
Q    So all this -- actually, I have a second question.  But just to clarify this, so this involves -- the White House is working to help shape that manager's amendment?   
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    Okay.  And on the visit of the Deputy Saudi Crown Prince today, can you talk us through a little bit more detail?  Does that involve the resumption of arms sales?  Is that about oil?  
MR. SPICER:  It literally was wrapping up as we were walking over here, so I want to make sure that I get a readout.  We’ll provide that to the pool, as we do with all the leader visits.  So I will have more details from that once -- they were concluding that visit as we were coming here, and so I’ll make sure I get it.
Blake.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  In the middle of all this, there is also the debt ceiling.  
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.
Q    How urgent of a priority is this?  And how concerned is the administration in tackling this, given the letter that Secretary Mnuchin sent out last week?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, so Secretary Mnuchin sent a letter noting that, under the Budget Reconciliation Act, the Congress’s debt authority had until March 15th.  He notified them of that.  We continue to work with Congress.  As you know, we’ll be releasing a budget later this week.  That's part and parcel of our approach to fiscal responsibility, to making sure that we talk about the path forward, how we address both the ending of fiscal year ’17 -- it goes until September 30th this year -- and then the budget, which would be fiscal year ’18.  But how we address our budget deficits, our debt, and our spending going forward is something that is a holistic conversation that the Secretary and Director Mulvaney and others, and the President and the Vice President are engaging with Congress on.   
So this isn’t -- our job under the law was to notify them of the authority that they passed when it expired, and I think the Secretary will work with Congress on a path forward as far as our debt situation. 
Q    Secondly, let me get your reaction to Jonathan Gruber, one of the architects of Obamacare.  He called essentially the plan that you've put forward, if it’s implemented, a “scam.”  Your reaction to that would be what?
MR. SPICER:  I think that the plan that he helped create hasn’t done so well for Americans seeking health insurance.  Again, I have to go to the numbers.  But just think about what he sought out to do.  There was a pool of people that needed healthcare; they got about 9 million of them.  You got 14.4-plus-or-minus million of people who claimed a hardship exemption -- so they have no insurance; that are not receiving Medicaid; that don't qualify for any other assistance, who can't afford Obamacare.  And then you've got another 6 million-plus that have chosen to pay the penalty.  So I would argue that just on what he sought to achieve in the plan that he helped craft didn't achieve too many great results.  Of the people that did get it, their premiums have gone sky high, their choices have gone down, and singlehandedly had a tremendous effect through the rest of the healthcare system.  
So people who weren’t even affected by Obamacare initially have now paid higher premiums and get less choices.  So even for 175 million people who get employer-based healthcare, they felt the impact of what he sought out to do through higher prices, few choices.  So, respectfully, I think that he should just hang out more time at MIT and focus -- and allow good ideas to continue to come forward so that we can focus on achieving the President's goal of doing what he sought out in the first place.
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  The President several times recently has said that he would like his healthcare plan to have healthcare for everybody.
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    The CBO score yesterday seems to indicate that that's not the case.  Will the White House commit that after these phases two and three, if they are implemented, if they're ever offered publicly, that there will be healthcare for everybody?  And if you can define that phrase, please.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I mean, I think everybody who wants -- look at what Obamacare did.  Again, I just ran through the numbers.  You've got 30-plus million people of an Obamacare-mandated -- under penalty of law that you had to have health insurance, 9 million of the 30-plus million -- 30 plus-or-minus people got it; 4 million -- 4.5 [million] said, no, we'll pay the penalty; and then another 14 or so million said that we'll claim a hardship.  So that was a government-mandated system, and they chose not to do it.
I think that in many of these cases, that if people were given the choice and the option to get a plan that sought their needs, was tailored to what they wanted, it wasn’t forced down their throat, that didn’t give them services they didn’t want, and brought down costs -- I read you some of the stories of the individuals -- and we've seen tremendous growth from people who got a reasonably priced plan on the individual market -- $119, $150 bucks a month, which I think for people who aren’t getting their services through Medicaid because of their financial situation, for many middle-class families, while that's still a struggle, it's an attainable goal in many cases.  
When you're talking about $350, $500 on the individual market, that's a huge chunk of someone's individual take-home pay.  And I think that getting a process that we have down that levels the playing field, allows people who aren’t getting it through an employer-based system to get a tax credit, that at the same time lowers cost and creates more competition and choices, is actually going to give more people the option to have healthcare and to give more Americans that ability.  I mean, right now, they're choosing not to do it.    
Q    (Inaudible) you more people.  That's still not everybody.  
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, but everybody has a choice to get it.  And that's what I think we want to do, is give everyone who wants to get healthcare the financial ability to get it is what the President is trying to achieve through this.  And I think this is the system that will get them there.  Right now, they're being forced to get it by a government-run system and in huge margins choosing not to.  I think that's the system.  And, by the way, they're getting a system that's failing and that is collapsing on its own and is only going in the wrong direction with higher prices, higher premiums, higher deductibles, and lower choice.
I mean, that's what you've got now:  If you're American citizen on the Obamacare exchange, you're paying more, you have a higher deductible, and your choice is going down.  And so that is an unsustainable, unacceptable outcome for Americans who need care.
Dave.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  On immigration, a group that tracks the number of sanctuary cities in the U.S. came out with a report today saying there's now nearly 500 sanctuary cities across the country, and that number has grown by about three dozen just this year.  Does that concern the White House?  And does it suggest that your warnings about withholding federal funds is not getting through to people?
MR. SPICER:  I think the last poll I saw on this issue, on sanctuary cities, was somewhere in the 80 percent that American people don’t support sanctuary cities, they don’t want their tax dollars used to finance people who are in this country illegally.  I think if you're a mayor or a councilman or a state representative or a governor in a state, you need to answer to the people that elected you, whether or not you're going to support this.  From a federal perspective, I think the President has been very clear that we're not going to use federal taxpayer dollars to support cities that support services to people who are here in this country illegally.  But I think at the end of the day, this is a question for mayors and councilmembers at the local level who have to answer to the people that elected them with clearly a position that is not in keeping with what most Americans believe.
Eamon.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  You mentioned the call with the CEO of Anthem Health.  Can you tell me what this proposal of the President means for health insurance companies?  Will their profits go up or down under the President's proposal?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I don’t think that's been the focus of the President's proposal.  It's not about them, it's about patients.  But I think what it means for them is that they finally get to create more choice and more plans and allow people to choose a plan that fits them.  Right now, they don’t have that choice.  And, frankly, in more and more markets, companies like Anthem, UnitedHealth, Signa are pulling out -- Aetna -- because they don’t have the choice and because of the government mandate.  I think what we want to do is allow competition and choice to exist so that they can offer more options for the American people.
Q    But will those companies make more money under the President's plan or less?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know the answer to that.  That's not been the focus of what we're doing now.  And at the end of the day, right now they're pulling out of market after market, leaving the American people with fewer and fewer choices.  So right now it's not a question of -- from the last I checked, I think many of them were doing pretty well, but it's the American people and its patients that are losing under the current system.  So I think that there's a way you can do a little of both.
Hunter.
Q    Yes.  We've seen the White House and Secretary Price push back on calling this healthcare bill "Trumpcare."  Does anything need to change for the President to be comfortable putting his name on the bill?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean, I don’t think -- the Obama administration didn’t label it Obamacare, they called it the ACA.  I mean, this is the American Health Care Act.  The President is proud of it.  The President is proud of the fact that we're working with Congress.  But this is a bill that is not his, it's a joint effort that we've worked with the House and the Senate on.  He's proud of it.  He's proud of the impact that it's going to have on American patients.  So I don’t think this is about labels and names, this is about getting a job done.
John.
Q    You keep pointing out that the CBO did not take into consideration phases two or three.  Some people might say that the White House has been criticizing the CBO for not taking into account phases two and three in their scoring of the first phase of this.  How are they supposed to take into account something that doesn’t yet exist?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that that's a question for the House offer.  There are constraints that are put on the CBO in terms of what they can't consider.  But I think that the point that we want to make is that -- and it came up yesterday at the briefing -- if members are going to base their vote off a score, they need to understand the totality and comprehensive nature of the entire program.  And so to base your score off of one piece of information is literally looking -- 
Q    But -- 
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, let me answer the question. 
Q    That's all they had.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  But what I’m saying is, is that the question that keeps being asked is to see all the reports on this about how it’s going to impact and not note -- I mean, I don't recall too many packages that read on the evening news last night, or too many of the stories noting that it was one piece of a comprehensive package, noting that it was prong one of three prongs.
So, respectfully, I think that when we've gone out here and tried to make sure that people understand the comprehensive nature of what’s happening and why it has to happen -- it wasn’t by choice that we had to do this.  There are certain ways that it had to be conducted because of how it was constructed in the first place in terms of how it gets repealed and replaced.  The reconciliation piece of this, which is inside-baseball Senate talk may not make sense to a lot of people, but it’s the way that we have to go -- the process by which we have to achieve this because of the Senate rules, which is how it was constructed in the first place when Democrats enacted it in 2009.
That being said, when we talk about this -- again, you guys, when there’s a report that comes out on the evening news, or on cable news, or in the paper, and it doesn't explain the comprehensive nature of this, and it just said, "the CBO says this is the impact, full stop," it is incumbent upon to make sure that people who are trying to understand what we're doing understand that there are two more pieces to come of this.
And like anything else, it’s like building a puzzle.  If you only put a third of it on the table and said, hey, look, this puzzle is incomplete, we hid the other two-thirds pieces, is not explaining to people how the whole thing comes together. 
I think that is a very, very important piece of explaining how this whole thing is going to matter and impact the American people.  
Q    The other thing I’m curious about, too, is can this thing -- the President called it a big, beautiful negotiation.  People like Jim Jordan say it’s a big, beautiful dud.  Is there a way to hammer this thing into shape where you can satisfy conservatives? 
MR. SPICER:  I hope so.
Q    Or do you have to -- as has been suggested by a number of people -- rip it up and start all over again?  Because Jim Jordan just this morning was saying that the fundamental aspects of what was promised the American people by House members when they ran for election back in the fall, and by the President when he ran for election, is not in this bill.
MR. SPICER:  Well, respectfully, I would suggest that it’s gone through two House committees that consisted of over 50 Republican members -- when you look at both committees -- with unanimous support.  So I get that we can't -- 
Q    (Inaudible) not a Freedom Caucus member on either one of those?
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  I don't know that that's actually true. 
Q    Well, that's what they said.   
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, but -- I’m going to use Major Garrett to fact-check you.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Well, that's just what they're saying.  They're saying they didn’t get a chance -- 
MR. SPICER:  Four Pinocchios -- John Roberts. 
Q    I did not say that.  (Laughter.)  
MR. SPICER:  But my point is, I think that we've got tremendous support.  The President, as I’ve stated, wants to work with them.  There will be a manager's amendment.  And I hope that ultimately -- yeah, I’d love to have every member support this on both sides of the aisle.  I think the President’s principles and goals are going to benefit every American.  And obviously, the more support we get, the better.
And as we continue to meet with members and talk to them and get their ideas, I think we're going to have a phenomenal outcome of this bill.  There’s a lot of ways we continue to gather input and ideas.  And the more that we can get that will achieve that goal, great.  
And so I hope that he continues to provide us with constructive ideas, and we look forward to getting as many as possible.  
Major.
Q    Sure, let’s continue that conversation, because the manager’s amendment -- 
MR. SPICER:  Now it’s John’s chance to fact check.  (Laughter.) 
Q    The manager’s amendment is a tacit admission that the bill, as written, can't pass.  You wouldn’t -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, that's not entirely true --
Q    You wouldn’t put together a manager’s amendment if you had the votes, correct? 
MR. SPICER:  Well, no, I think it’s an admission of what we stated at the beginning of this entire process, which is the President was going to engage with members to hear their ideas.  He welcomed them.  Director Mulvaney stated it multiple times, and Secretary Price, the Vice President.  We're not -- this has never been a “take it or leave it.”  And I’ve said it from this podium; the President has talked about it, as you mentioned just a second ago.  This is an opportunity to hear from individuals and groups and insurance -- and victims of Obamacare, doctors -- 
Q    So is the goal of the manager's amendment to win more Freedom Caucus support -- 
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  It’s not a question of just -- it’s not about --
Q    -- by dealing with Medicaid or the tax credits or some other alterations?  
MR. SPICER:  It’s not about one caucus or one member.  
Q    It’s not?
MR. SPICER:  No.  I think this is about bringing people together.  And if we have great ideas that will achieve a better outcome for the American people, then we're going to listen to them and we're going to incorporate them.  I don't think that this is -- we have been very clear from the get-go:  If you can come with a good idea that will strengthen this bill, that will benefit American patients, we’ll do it.
And so the manager’s amendment is -- 
Q    Passing a bill is about getting votes, right?  You can't have a strong bill that can't pass, right? 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, you can -- absolutely.  But you can jam through a bill and get it out, and get 218 and send it over to the Senate.  But I think that we want to get the strongest bill through the House with as many ideas and opinions and facts that will help strengthen this as possible.
So I’d rather -- instead of getting a bill through with 218, 219 -- work on a process as the Speaker and the Majority Leader have done that brings in additional ideas.  And if we can get the bill higher and higher, we will.  
Q    To Tom Cotton’s point -- because you talked about it just a second ago, prongs two and three -- he went out of his way to describe that process, process two and three -- because at least the third part of that is going to require 60 votes because it’s outside of reconciliation -- by definition “as mythical, imaginary, and just spin.”  And he’s telling House Republicans, don't buy into this third- or second-prong argument because a practical, legislative matter don't exist.  Because you need 60 votes to get them.  And so if you “walk the plank” -- his words, not mine -- on this first initiative, you're not going to get second and third phase of this process because it can't get through the Senate.
MR. SPICER:  So there’s a couple things.  First, this is the only vehicle that seeks to achieve what people on our side of the aisle have been talking about since 2010.  This is it.  If we don't get this through, the goal of repealing Obamacare and instituting a system that will be patient-centered is going to be unbelievably difficult.  This is the vehicle to do that.  And so we welcome Senator Cotton’s ideas.  
But the second prong of this is administrative in nature.  It is something that was delegated to Kathleen Sebelius, who was then the Secretary of Health and Human Services, to do.  So prong two is actually fairly easy to do, because the same authority that was granted to Secretary Sebelius now is in the auspices of Dr. Price.  And he has the ability to implement and work on that, and I think he noted it yesterday that his office has already been going through and doing that.  So that phase is easy to do.
The third prong, which is all of these things that conservatives have been championing for a long time, and, frankly, many Democrats agree with us on, is this ability to bring down costs through selling over state lines and allowing small businesses to group together is something that we've been talking about for over a decade.
Q    And you can get 60 votes?
MR. SPICER:  And I think that we can not just get 60 -- I think this is something that should bring people together.  I think there is bipartisan, bicameral support for almost every one of these things because they benefit -- there is no one that doesn't benefit.  Who could be against allowing insurance to be sold over state lines?  It’s something that you can do your car insurance -- so many -- there is no other product that I can think of -- I’m sure someone will fact-check me on this -- but for the most part, the American consumer, when you want a product, you can go online, you can go to a store.  You have choice.  You could go to a store across state lines.  If you live in Virginia, you can drive to Maryland or the District and shop around.  With our insurance, we don't have that ability.  There’s no question that increased competition drives down cost. It is just an economic certainty.  And allowing greater choice will do the same.  And so I think, respectfully, I would say to any senator that has that concern, there is no other entity that I can think of that greater choice and greater competition doesn’t drive down cost significantly.
And all we have to do is look no farther than Obamacare.  I read off three of the individuals the President met with yesterday who were victims of Obamacare.  In every one of those cases, the insurance premium went skyrocketing when what?  When choice and competition went away.  
Most any person that was in the individual market eight or nine years ago will tell you that depending on the plan, you could get a plan for as low as 100 bucks and change.  Now the cheapest plan you can get is easily in the $300 range.  And so the question that you have to ask yourself is, what changed?  Competition went down and choice went down.  And I think allowing both of those to reenter the marketplace will achieve in itself that goal.  And going through the additional pieces of the reform will also do the same thing.  
There’s so many ways that we can achieve greater choice and competition that unquestionably bring down the cost of health care that benefits every American, whether or not you're in the exchanges or you're on an employer-based plan.
And again, we have to have this conversation in the context of what’s going on now.  Talk to somebody that's on Medicare or Medicaid.  Ask them if the doctor and services that they used to be getting are available to them.  I know so many times now when you walk into the doctor they have a sign that says, “We no longer accept Medicaid.”  That used to be a given almost.  And now, for older Americans, for Americans at the lower end of the income scale, it's becoming harder and harder to find a place that even takes your insurance.  
And I think that to find that an acceptable income -- the question has to be asked of people who oppose this, no matter what side of the aisle they’re on, is, what is your alternative?  Because the ideas that they propose we can incorporate, we can make this better and better.  But to sit back and act as though there’s a choice.  Doing nothing is not a choice.  And that's something the President had done.
Trey.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  As you know, the DOJ now has an additional week to produce evidence that President Trump was wiretapped by the Obama administration.  How confident is President Trump that any evidence will arise to support his claim?
MR. SPICER:  I think he’s extremely confident.  There’s been -- I mean, I mentioned this before -- I'll let them do their job.  I'll let the House and Senate and I'll let the DOJ report this.  But as I commented in the past, I think there’s significant reporting about surveillance techniques that have existed throughout the 2016 election.  I'll leave it to them to issue their report.  But I think he feels very confident it that will ultimately come to this -- will vindicate him.
Q    And a quick follow-up.  When a decision is announced, whatever evidence or potentially no evidence is released, will he make a statement about the evidence or lack of evidence?
MR. SPICER:  I've been asked this I think at least three times, and I don't want to prejudge what’s going to come.  I'm sure you will do a fine job of asking me the question when there’s a report to be asked and I will not be able to escape it.  But I don't want to get ahead of what the President may or may not do.
Jim.
Q    Evidence will be presented?
MR. SPICER:  I don't want to get ahead of -- as I mentioned, I'm not going to --
Q    Because the House Intelligence Committee has given the administration until Monday --
MR. SPICER:  I understand -- no, it's given the DOJ, and the Department of Justice.  Again, we covered this yesterday.  But I'm not going to get ahead of what they may or may not submit.
Q    It's possible there may be nothing.
MR. SPICER:  No, that's not -- I think there is -- at least from where we stand, we know that there’s significant reporting on the subject that --
Q    Something will be presented.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I feel very confident of that.
Q    Okay.  And a follow-up on coverage.  You were saying that people -- if they can't get access to insurance, they don't have coverage.  But if you remove the individual mandate, you are going to have people who are not going to buy coverage, they’re not going to buy insurance.  And so getting back to the Congressional Budget Office score, would you concede that there will be some coverage losses, perhaps in the millions?  That there will be millions of people who will not have health insurance as a result of what you're doing?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again -- sure, except you have to look at the current situation.  You are mandated by law to buy insurance right now under Obamacare; 13-plus million people have asked for a hardship exemption, and 6.5-plus million people have determined to pay the penalty.  So, currently, if we look at the universe and say it's roughly 30 million people, only 9 million people engaged in the exchanges when required by law.  The majority, almost two-thirds, if my back-of-the-envelope math is right -- about two-thirds have chosen to either apply for a hardship exemption or pay a penalty.
Q    The mandate forces people to buy insurance, and if they don't have insurance then you have the free rider problem in the system -- 
MR. SPICER:  Right.  But look at what’s happening now --
Q    -- which was a problem in the Obama administration.  You have free riders and those folks --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, because the current --
Q    -- in a car accident, they show up at the emergency room, and then the health care is much more expensive.
MR. SPICER:  But my point, Jim, is that the way the system was constructed under Obamacare, they created a system to force people to buy plans that they did not like.  They were mandated by the government in terms of what was part of the plan, what it had to cover, the deductible, et cetera, et cetera, and yet, roughly two-thirds of the people either paid a penalty or asked for a hardship exemption.  They didn’t do it. 
And so the idea is, actually, if you could bring down cost and choices and allow people to find a plan that fit their budget, that was tailored to their needs, there is actually a higher likelihood that they will find something that they want at a price that they can afford -- as to right now, which is I get a plan that I'm forced to buy that has a deductible that I can't afford, but I've got a cute little plastic card that I can wave around.
Q    But it will get you coverage.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, that's not true.
Q    If you show up at the emergency room, if you’ve been hit by a bus, you're not going to need to pay out of pocket to the hospital until you die.  You're going to have some sort of catastrophic coverage that will make sure you have insurance. That is the point.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you, that's a great advertisement for --
Q    You're welcome.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  That's exactly what the President is trying to do.  Because right now you’ve got -- of the attempt to get 30 million people covered, 14.4 or 14.5 million people applied for a hardship exemption.  They’re exactly the people that you're talking about.  Another 6.5 million people have paid the penalty and don't have it.  So we have roughly 20 million people in this country who were supposed to be paying -- required to buy health care that have chosen not to do it who fall in exactly the category that you're talking about.  The question --
Q    But that number is massive by the year 2026 -- more than 20 million Americans --
MR. SPICER:  But if they actually had choices and had a plan option that was down near a budget that they could afford, there is a higher likelihood that they would buy a plan that was, A, tailored to them, and B, actually that they could afford.
So to your question about catastrophic, right now that's in most cases not even an option.  In a third of all the counties in the United States, they only have one choice.  In five states, they have one choice.  Can you imagine if they could actually buy a plan --
Q    You're saying a talking point, but at least --
MR. SPICER:  It's not a talking point.
Q    -- there’s coverage in those states.  There's an option of coverage.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, it means -- right, and in a lot of --
Q    If you pull this away then you're going to have people in a lot of states who aren't going to have access to any coverage --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, totally false.
Q    -- because they can't afford it with these tax credits that you're providing.  
MR. SPICER:  No, no --
Q    There’s an argument to the other side --
MR. SPICER:  No, there’s not.  No, actually --
Q    The subsidies are more generous --
MR. SPICER:  You’ve got 175 million Americans that get their insurance through their employer.  And frankly, right now they’re the ones who keep paying higher and higher premiums because a system that was only supposed to help people get access and require them -- get a government-mandated, government-run healthcare has actually gone amuck.  And so right now --
Q    You say government-run health care.  Medicare is government run.
MR. SPICER:  Right, and what’s happening --
Q    You don't have senior citizens screaming that they want you to get rid of their Medicare.
MR. SPICER:  Yes, they are.  I think you need to maybe get outside and talk to some of them, because more and more Medicaid recipients -- in fact, more and more Medicare recipients -- aren't actually able to get coverage.  Again, it's one thing to have a card.  It's another thing to walk into a doctor’s office and them to tell you, we no longer accept Medicaid anymore.  That's not care.
Q    But the President is okay with there are going to be millions of people who aren't going to have coverage?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, the President’s goal is to provide healthcare coverage to every American.  And right now they’re not getting that.  And by giving them more choices at a lower cost, more Americans can either buy healthcare for their family or themselves, or, in a lot of cases, for their business, without paying the penalty, which is what a lot of them are doing, or forcing people into exchanges that have fewer and fewer choices. 
The system now is not working.  The costs are going up, the choices are going down, and deductibles are going up.  That is not an option.  And for every American -- and I mentioned this earlier -- to make this look like a choice, there isn’t really a choice.  The system that we have now is failing.  The choice is whether we give them an opportunity to have real care and in a way that is tailored to them in their budget.
Jeff.
Q    Sean, on a different subject.  The Intelligence Committee yesterday, when responding to the Department of Justice's request for more time, basically issued a subpoena threat.  Does the White House have a reaction to that?  Do you think it will come that far?
MR. SPICER:  I hope not.  And as I said, as has been noted, the Department asked for additional time, and that will be up to the Intelligence Committee to grant that time.  But they're working on that.  
Q    And on a separate note, you mentioned the President's call with the CEO of Anthem today.  Does he have a position on Anthem's effort to merge with Signa, which was challenged by the Justice Department under President Obama?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- I'm not aware of that.  I don’t know that that would -- that the President has ever expressed any personal view.  I think that would come under the FTC, if I'm correct, and so I'd refer you to them.
John.
Q    Just one last follow-up on Margaret's question about Saudi.  I know that that meeting was just finishing up when you came out here, but can you give us a sense of what was on the agenda before they sat down?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President had a call earlier with the King, a couple weeks back.  I think they talked about safe havens in Syria, they talked about the threat of ISIS.  I would expect all of those came up.  But again, I think -- I will provide a readout to you all, to everyone in the pool, about what happened that will more clearly define that.
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Coming up in the rest of the year are four special elections for the U.S. House of Representatives, all of which are sure to draw national attention as venues for debate on the American Health Care Act.  Does the President plan to be involved on behalf of the Republican candidates and perhaps appear on their behalf of the districts as this may well be a barometer of where people feel about the American Health Care Act?
MR. SPICER:  You're also going to have elections in Virginia and New Jersey, as far as I'm aware.  And I think that as we get further into the schedule and get closer to elections, we'll obviously entertain requests from candidates at a variety of -- level to gauge the President's support.  So he's been very supportive of candidates in the last cycle.  I don’t see him not being -- continued support of people that want to fight hard for the agenda.  We're not at that point yet, so I can probably give you more at some point as we move closer to the elections.  But in a lot of those cases it's going to be dependent on whether or not there's a request from the candidate or not.
Julie.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  You said earlier that the White House doesn’t have projections on how many people will lose coverage.  Is that a projection that hasn’t been made yet?  Are you saying that the White House is not going to come out with those numbers?
MR. SPICER:  That's not something that OMB does.
Q    But if you're advocating for a plan that you say the President wants to cover everyone, how are you going to be able to assess whether you've been successful if you're not going to project that yourself and CBO's projections, you're saying, are invalid?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that if you look at what the goal is, which is to make healthcare available to every American -- as I said, I mean, you have a choice right now that's either we support a failing system that there is no choice and that the premiums are going up, or you provide them with a system that we're looking at, which does address the 30 million people -- it gives them a tax credit, it gives them great choice.  And one of the issues that I have with a lot of the models that I see around is they're very static; they talk about this prong only.  I think when you look at the subsidy and the cost of a current plan right now, without looking at prong two and three and how those will additionally drive down cost, that it's not a fair analysis of where the plan is going.  
But there's no question that right now there is -- I detailed it to Jim -- I mean, we have a system that mandates that people buy health insurance under penalty of law, and it's not working.  And so the question is, what can we do instead and what can we replace that with that gives people greater choice and lowers cost.  I think in most cases, of course some people are always going to choose in a free society to not purchase something -- I mean, we live in a country of 320 million people -- at some point, you can't force a product or a good down people in a free society.  But I think if you can give them a quality product that serves their needs, that they have the time, at a price that they can afford, there's a greater likelihood under every economic model that that suggests that that will work.
So I think it's, frankly, economics 101 and basic common sense that dictate that the more competition and the more choice that we institute in the system, the greater likelihood of more and more Americans getting healthcare is something that is easy.
John.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  I want to ask you about the American Health Care Act, but I want to first see if you have an answer to a question that I asked you yesterday, and that was one that you did not know the full answer to, about whether there are repercussions for violations of that five-year lobbying ban.
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry, I do owe you an explanation on that.  I will check with Counsel and get back to you.
Q    Okay.  And then on the American Health Care Act, you use language very similar to language that House Speaker Paul Ryan used about why Republicans should support this legislation.  You talked about this binary choice -- it's either this particular legislation or it's Obamacare.  You have Republicans in control of the House and the Senate, you have President Trump in the White House.  Why do they have to vote on this particular bill?  Why can't they negotiate for something that, for instance, the Freedom Caucus thinks may be a better piece of legislation?
MR. SPICER:  Well, to get back to a question that Major asked -- I mean, at the end of the day, whatever it is has to at least get 218 votes.  You obviously want the greatest number of votes as possible, but you need to get 218, and in the case of the Senate under reconciliation, only 50 votes.  But that's your floor.  And I think that what you need to do is to get enough members coalescing around key principles to get you to that floor.  Now, you can obviously go as high as 435 in terms of the ceiling.  I'm not sure we'll hit that.  But the floor is what's going to coalesce the greatest number of members around a bill that gets you at 218.  
So we will continue to work with them, provide ideas and input.  And regardless of what caucus or faction you're a part of, if you have an idea that can enhance this bill and make it more patient-centric and achieve the goals, then we're all for it.  So that's a process.  And I think Speaker Ryan has been talking about this since 2010.  There have been a lot of ideas, a lot of debate, and a lot of issues put forward into how to craft this. 
So this has been something that's been in the works for seven-plus years in terms of getting members, at least in the Republican conference, to coalesce around principles and ideas and solutions to make this a more patient-centric thing.
Francesca.
Q    Two quick clarifications and then one other thing.  It sounded like you were telling Mike to ask Paul Ryan about phases two and three.  Phase two would be regulatory measures that the President and Secretary Price would be in charge of.  When can we expect to see a list of those from the White House?
MR. SPICER:  I will ask Secretary Price.  I know that he mentioned yesterday when he came out to talk to folks after the score, that his office was working on that.  I'll be glad to see if we have a timeline on that, and then follow up with you on that.
Q    And also, it sounded like you were saying that the White House is confident that you'll get to 60 votes on those things in phase three, those measures that conservatives have been asking for.  Is the White House confident about the 60 votes?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    Okay.  And then the final thing is, it's also on healthcare as well.  Yesterday, Secretary Price said that he wasn’t saying to disregard the CBO report completely.  But that sounds like what the administration is arguing and what you're arguing as well from the podium.  You said that the CBO coverage estimates are consistently wrong --
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.
Q    -- and you've questioned their credibility from here.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, just to be clear, CBO is a budget office.  They look at impacts on the federal budget.  That is why they were created, and that's what they do.  And I think to look at them in terms of their budget numbers is one thing; that's their job.  And I think on the aspect of budget impact, it talked about how while we currently see a 25 percent increase in premiums this year under Obamacare and the individual market, it markedly shows that under the current American Health Care Act, there will be a 10 percent decline in premium.
Where I think the CBO has gotten it wrong -- and it's not a question of what we characterize it as; it's a fact -- the CBO, when it tried to project people and coverage, was over 50 percent wrong the last time.  And the point that I think we're trying to make is that when you look at their record and you say the last time they did this they were off by more than 50 percent -- they projected 24 million who would be covered by Obamacare in the exchanges in 2016; in fact, that number was initially 10.4 and it's dropping.  
And so the question that you have to ask yourself is, if you're using that as a gauge to determine our vote, you need to question whether or not they do counting people like they do counting numbers.  I think on the budget thing, that's what their wheelhouse is for, that's what they do -- they count budget -- they look at budgetary impact on things.  When they have come to counting people, they've been wrong and vastly so.  And I think it's important for people to understand that context in which those numbers are given to you.  And I think that's something that I just want to make sure of.
Jordan.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  I asked you yesterday about the President's response to Steve King.  Do you have anything on that?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President believes that this is not a point of view that he shares.  He believes he's the President for all Americans, and so I'll leave it at that.
Jim.
Q    Reports surfaced Friday that the President will support primary challengers to conservative lawmakers who don’t support the final version of the American Health Care Act.  Can you confirm that report?  And if it's true, can you offer us insight into what the President is looking for in congressional candidates in 2018?
MR. SPICER:  I'm not going to -- I don’t have anything for you on that.
Veronica.
Q    Sean, it's Ronica.
MR. SPICER:  Ronica.
Q    I'm sorry.
MR. SPICER:  No, I'm sorry.
Q    If we fix it now, we get it done.  Okay, two questions.  The first one:  Does the President believe that he was surveilled through microwaves and televisions?
MR. SPICER:  I'm not going to -- I will just say the President has tweeted about this.  He's pretty clear that he believes that there was surveillance that was conducted during the 2016 election, and we're going to wait for the conclusion of that.  I think there's pretty sound evidence that has been -- that the microwave is not a sound way of surveilling someone.  And I think that has been cleaned up.  It was made in jest.  So I think we can put that to rest.
Q    Okay.  Second question.  Newt Gingrich said that the COB [sic] should be abolished.  You're saying some pretty harsh words against parts, aspects of the COB.  Would the President agree with that?
MR. SPICER:  CBO.
Q    Oh, excuse me.
MR. SPICER:  No, I got it wrong with you.  So now we're even.  (Laughter.)   
But look, that's -- Speaker Gingrich obviously -- I'll let him comment on the House.  CBO was established I think in the Budget Act from 1974.  It's up to members to decide on the House and Senate whether or not they want to go through this.  We've got OMB, they've got CBO.  I'm not going to get in the business of telling the House who their scorekeeper should be in the House.  
Cecilia.
Q    Sean, just quickly, I wanted to circle back on something.  You started to answer it, but apologies if you did.  I want to clarify, though.  Can you stand here today and say that the President will keep his promise of insurance for everybody?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President's goal is to provide insurance -- to make insurance available to everybody, yes.  That's what he intends to do.  I think that is -- the goal of this is to make sure that every American has the choice and a plan that they can afford and that they have the choice to buy.  And that's not what they have now.
Q    Sean, thanks very much.  I wonder if the White House has a view on reports from Bloomberg that Jared Kushner's family stands to gain around half a billion dollars from a real estate deal with Anbang Corporation, which is linked to the Chinese government, or has been linked to the Chinese government in the past.
MR. SPICER:  I don’t.  I mean, I'd leave that -- I'd refer you back to the Kushner companies to talk about their entities.  Jared went through extraordinary lengths, as you all know, and we provided a lot of documentation on this, to make sure that he -- although he's not taking a salary here -- that he complied as if he was an employee, and went through extraordinary lengths to make sure that he de-conflicted himself and worked through the Office of Government Ethics.
Q    Is Jared currently working on preparations for Xi Jinping's visit to Mar-a-Lago?
MR. SPICER:  I'm sure he's involved in a lot of stuff.  I don’t know specifically who's involved in that visit. 
Q    Sean, you did just say that the President still stands by making sure that insurance can be afforded by everyone.  What's your specific response to the CBO's estimate that for someone who's 64 years old, making $26,000, that right now, under current law, they would shell out $1,700 in a premium, but under this change, the premium would go up from $1,700 to $14,600?  What's the message to a 54-year-old, who, 10 years from now, faces that?
MR. SPICER:  I think that, again, I would go back to the fact that I don’t think that that analysis takes into consideration the choice that they have.  Part of the problem right now, Steve, is a 54-year-old doesn’t need certain things.  They don’t need maternity care, they don’t need certain medical services that are being provided to them by this government product that is being forced on them right now.  
So, number one, you have a product that is being served up to older Americans, middle-aged Americans, or younger Americans that doesn’t fit where they are in life and the services that they need.  And so, number one, having more choice and the ability to tailor a plan towards the needs that an individual has depending on their stage of life, whether it's an individual or a family, number one.  Number two, that they don’t have any competition.  So when you combine both of those things together, I think that number goes way down.  And then the third is that they can have whatever subsidy they want now, but on the exchange, in many cases, again, they're getting a subsidy to a plan that has a very high deductible so that they have a card but not care.  And that is, again, not an apples-to-apples way to examine the current plans.  And that's what this really all comes down to.
Q    So the message then is, wait until phases two and three come in, and then we'll have something better?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I mean, I think -- it's not just wait, it's that you have to look at the totality of what we're doing to understand how this is going to impact the plan.  But right now, in the scenario that you're giving, a 54-year-old doesn’t have choice, is buying a plan that they don’t want or need for the most part, and has a subsidy that's probably not giving them the ability to go see the doctors that they need to because their deductible is off the chart.  And that's one thing that's missing in a lot of these discussions, is that you can have a premium for month, but if your deductible is skyrocketing, then, again, you might be able to get an appointment, but you're not getting care.
Sharon.
Q    Oh, Cheryl.  Thanks.
MR. SPICER:  Cheryl.  I'm not good on this side.  (Laughter.)  
Q    The budget is coming out Thursday, and I'm just trying to find out how detailed is that going to be.  Are you going to be giving agency levels, program levels?  Or are we going to see what programs are going to be eliminated in the budget?
MR. SPICER:  I'll let Director Mulvaney -- he's going to have an entire presentation.  I know they'll start background briefings tomorrow for you all.  They'll walk through different aspects of the budget.  I don’t want to get ahead of him on this.  So let's figure out where we go first on this with what he has, and then we'll have a full presentation on Thursday.
Q    Can you just say if the infrastructure plan is going to be part of that, or is that going to be later?
MR. SPICER:  No, that's separate.  That is separate.  
Gabi.
Q    Thanks.  I have two questions.  The first one:  The President, one of his signature campaign promises on immigration was to pursue HB-1 visa reform.  And on April 1st, the United States will begin accepting new HB-1 visa applications.  Can we expect to see any movement on that before then?
MR. SPICER:  That's a good question.  I don’t -- I think -- we've talked about immigration in the past.  I think there is an entire comprehensive process that's being looked at in terms of how we're preventing illegal immigration and then what we're doing about legal immigration, whether it's H1-Bs or K1 or other visas that exist within the system.  There is an entire look that is being taken with respect to the visa program.  And we will have more for you as we get through the system.
Thank you, guys, very much.  We're headed off to Detroit and Nashville tomorrow.  If you're not on the trip, we look forward to -- I hope everyone wears their green on Thursday and Friday.  You got a double shot at it this year because of the visit.  So thank you.  Stay safe on the roads.
Q    How are you all going to do the background briefings?
MR. SPICER:  Right here.
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 3/16/2017, #25
James S. Brady Briefing Room
3:04 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  Sorry for the delay, guys.  It's budget day.  I was supposed to kick this off with Director Mulvaney.  He's still on a call with the governors, and continues to host a ton of briefings today with key stakeholders.  And so my goal, if this times out right, is that as we finish up, Director Mulvaney will walk in the room, right on cue, and then he will talk to you a little bit about the budget, and we'll walk through Q&A on that.  So hopefully this all works.
I'm going to skip past the part where I say "thank you, Director Mulvaney."  (Laughter.)  
As the Director will say, the President’s budget blueprint keeps his promise to put America's security first, turning his words directly into policies that restore respect for our citizens’ hard-earned tax dollars.
There were some additional non-events -- non-budget events of the day.  This morning, the President had a bilateral meeting with Taoiseach Kenny of Ireland.  Our two nations have a long history, common values, and important economic ties.
The President was honored to host him here in the Oval Office and recommit to strong social, political, and economic relations between the U.S. and Ireland.
This afternoon, the President made the remarks at the Friends of Ireland Luncheon at the Capitol.  This traditional lunch celebrating America’s bipartisan commitment to peace and security in Ireland was started in 1983 by President Reagan and Speaker O’Neill -- both proud Irish Americans -- and has been attended by every President, Speaker, and Taoiseach of Ireland since then.
And also, while at the Capitol this afternoon, right around now, the Vice President is swearing in former Senator Dan Coats as the next Director of National Intelligence in his ceremonial office.  Former Senator Coats has clearly demonstrated the deep subject -- the subject matter expertise and sound judgment required to lead our intelligence community, and the President is finally glad have him on board as part of him team.
Later this evening, the President, along with Taoiseach Kenny, will attend the St. Patrick’s Day Reception and participate in the annual Shamrock Ceremony.  Since 1952, the President has invited the Taoiseach to come to the White House in celebration of St. Patrick’s Day, where they present a bowl of shamrocks as a symbol of the profound and lasting relationship between the two countries.  The President and Taoiseach Kenny will also make remarks.
I have a few more notes before I get to Director Mulvaney.  First, I wanted to share with you guys -- it's a letter that should be going out shortly, if it hasn’t already, that the President signed this morning, wishing Ray Chavez, the oldest living survivor of Pearl Harbor, a happy 105th birthday.
Our nation owes Mr. Chavez’s generation -- a Great Generation -- a debt of gratitude for an extraordinary legacy of liberty and freedom around the world, fighting to ensure security and prosperity for millions.  A copy of the letter will be sent out, if it hasn’t already.  And obviously, we all extend our warm wishes to Ray and his family and they celebrate his 105th.  And the President signed the letter wishing that he hopes to have several more birthdays to come.
This afternoon, the President announced his intent to nominate several individuals to key posts at the Department of Defense:  Robert Daigle as Director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation; Elaine McCusker as Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense; David Norquist as Under Secretary of Defense and Comptroller; Kenneth Rapuano as Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global Security; Patrick Shanahan as Deputy Secretary of Defense; and David Joel Trachtenberg as Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Policy.
The President is glad to have these extremely qualified men and women on board to assist Secretary Mattis as he undertakes the great rebuilding of our nation’s military.
Also this afternoon, the President declared a major disaster in the State of California and ordered federal assistance to supplement state, tribal, and local recovery efforts in the areas affected by severe winter storms, flooding, and mudslides this January.
We also announced this afternoon that Second Lady Karen Pence will lead the Presidential Delegation to the 2017 Special Olympics World Winter Games in Austria.
The House Budget Committee met earlier this morning and approved the American Health Care Act, making it now the third committee to move the AHCA forward.  We’re working hand in glove with the House to consider improvements, and we’re confident that this thoughtful and thorough process will lead to legislation that reforms our healthcare, making it affordable and accessible to every American.
Since we won’t have a chance to meet tomorrow in light of the President and Chancellor Merkel's press conference, I wanted to quickly walk you through a couple of events on the President's schedule.
Tomorrow, of course, the President will welcome German Chancellor Merkel here to the White House, a rescheduling from the snow, inclement weather that prevented that from happening the other day.  The President and the Chancellor will have a series of meetings and then will host a roundtable focusing on the importance of vocational training with both American and German business leaders.
They will also have a press conference in the afternoon. We’ll have details on the entire day later this afternoon.
Also tomorrow, the President will attend a listening session with Veterans Affairs and VA Secretary Shulkin and representatives from the various Veterans Service Organizations.
It's incredibly important to the President that we reform the VA system so that it can fulfill the promises made to the men and women who risked their lives for our nation.  He looks forward to discussing potential changes that can help improve the Veterans Administration.
On Monday, the President will meet with Bill Gates, the cofounder of Microsoft.  He'll also have lunch with the Vice President and a meeting with the Secretary of State.
Later that afternoon, the President will welcome Prime Minister Abadi of Iraq to the White House.
And on Wednesday, the President has invited all 49 members of the Congressional Black Caucus to come to the White House for a meeting.  The President looks forward to welcoming [them] for what he hopes will be a productive discussion.
And I also want to remind everyone that -- I did yesterday, via Twitter -- that the lottery for the 139th Annual White House Easter Egg Roll is open until Saturday -- this coming Saturday.  Everyone who is interested in attending can go to Recreation.gov.  Further information is at WhiteHouse.gov for details. 
At his rally last night, the President addressed the decision by the federal district court in Hawaii to block his lawful executive order.  As the President said last night, “The law and the Constitution give the President the power to suspend immigration when he deems it to be necessary in the national interest...”  The Court didn't even bother to quote the relevant statute in its opinion, which could have plainly shown that the President clearly has this authority.
I know you’ve heard it before, but since the Court didn’t, let me quote it again for you.  8 U.S. Code 1182 states:  “Whenever the President finds [that] the entry of any aliens or of any class of aliens into the United States would be detrimental to the interests of the United States, he may by proclamation, and for such period as he [shall] deem necessary, suspend the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens as immigrants or nonimmigrants, or impose on the entry of aliens any restrictions he may deem [to be] appropriate.”
The Department of Justice said in a statement that they “strongly disagree[s] with the federal district court’s ruling, which is flawed both in reasoning and [in] scope.”  DOJ continued, “The President’s executive order falls squarely within his lawful authority in seeking to protect our nation’s security, and the Department will continue to defend this executive order in the courts.”
The Department is exploring all available options to vigorously defend this executive order.  We intend to appeal the flawed rulings.  Currently, the Department of Justice is determining the legal strategy and timing.  We expect action to be taken soon to appeal the ruling in the 4th Circuit and to seek clarification of the order prior to appeal in the 9th Circuit.
The danger is real, and the law is clear.  The President was elected to change our broken immigration system, and he will continue to exercise his constitutional authority and presidential responsibility to protect our nation.
And just before I get to your questions, and then before we’ll introduce Director Mulvaney, I just wanted to follow up on a couple of questions that have come up recently.
Jon Decker asked multiple times on the enforcement of the President’s executive order to restrict lobbying activities of executive branch employees, which includes a five-year ban on lobbying agencies where you've served and a lifetime ban on lobbying from foreign governments.  
I said I’d get back to Jon, so here we go.  The executive order itself has a section, Section 5, which focuses on enforcement.  The order outlines that each agency head is tasked with working with the Office of Government Ethics to establish procedures for determining potential violations of the ethics pledge.  Should a violation be determined, the executive order authorizes the Department of Justice to enforce the order through several mechanisms: debarment proceedings -- these would restrict an individual or his or her associated entities from doing business with the federal government; seeking an injunction, such as a restraining order from lobbying for 10 years -- the five years in the ethics agreement plus an additional five years; or civil penalties such as a fine commensurate with the nature of the violation.
The President fully expects the Department of Justice to vigorously enforce this executive order. 
Also yesterday several of you asked where the House is in regard to additional legislation as outlined in the third prong of the AHCA and the President’s plan to reform healthcare.  I’m pleased to note that last night Leader McCarthy in the House introduced four pieces of legislation that will remove burdensome regulations, lower costs, and increase access as we've noted:  the Competitive Health Insurance Reform Act, H.R. 372, which eliminates anti-trust protection for an insurance provider, creating competition so that Americans are not left with just one choice for healthcare coverage; the Small Business Health Fairness Act, H.R. 1101, which allows small businesses to band together and negotiate lower prices; the Protecting Access to Care Act, H.R. 1215, which limits frivolous lawsuits that unnecessarily drive up healthcare costs; and the Self-Insurance Protection Act, H.R. 1304, which protects workers who get their healthcare coverage from employers that self-insure by providing a backstop on catastrophic losses.  
And finally, in terms of following up from yesterday, in regard to the DOJ’s indictments of Russian hackers on Yahoo data, this action demonstrates the United States’ commitment to identifying cyber criminals and bringing them to justice, no matter where they are.  It also highlights the criminal importance of international cooperation to our cyber regime.  And like I said, yesterday, though this is a lawful enforcement action, anything beyond that, I would direct you to the Department of Justice and the FBI for further details.
Before I continue, let me turn it over to Director Mulvaney to talk a little bit about the budget. 
Director?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Thanks very much.  Good afternoon, and happy day before St. Patrick’s Day, also known as Budget Day.  Most of you heard me talk about the budget before so I’m not going to say too many things in opening before we get to your questions.  But we will remind you that this is what we're calling the America First Budget.  We had an America First candidate; you now have an America First President.  And it shouldn’t surprise anybody that we have an America First Budget.  It’s in the details, as we talked about last week -- $54 billion of additional defense spending.  We have some more details today on where that money is going.
We're seeing increases at the VA, increases within the Department of Justice for law enforcement, increases within the Department of Homeland Security for things that include border security and immigration controls.  Immigration is within -- excuse me -- increases within the Department of Energy to deal with a nuclear triad.
And then corresponding reductions in similar amounts offsetting dollar for dollar in other programs.  The largest reduction if you've seen the budget already is a 31 percent reduction within the Environmental Protection Agency.  The next largest reduction on a percentage basis is within Department of State; and the other departments are reduced in lesser amounts.  I think the smallest reduction we have is NASA, which is just less than 1 percent.  But there again, as with many of the agencies, you’ll see certain line items within those budgets plussed up.
This is the message the President wanted to send to the public, to the press, to Capitol Hill:  he wants more money for defense; more money for border enforcement; more money for law enforcement generally; more money for the vets; more money for school choice.  And then to offset that money with savings elsewhere so that all of that is done without an additional dollar added to the deficit. 
As I’ve mentioned before, the budget does not balance the budget.  This budget simply reallocates and reprioritizes spending as any family or business would do.
This budget does not -- for those of you who were not here last week -- this budget does not address the big-picture items such as policy changes, revenue flows, tax policy, mandatory spending.  This is simply the topline spending budget.  That's why we call it the budget blueprint, and not the full budget.  That full budget, which will contain all the rest of those pieces and parts, will be released in May.
Before I take questions, I’m going to do something I don’t ordinarily do -- I’m sure it’s kind of new -- I’m going to call on the New York Times because they’re in trouble.  Apparently, is there a -- where’s my New York Times guy?  Matt Flegenheimer and Alan Rappeport -- okay, are in big trouble.  I’ll give you the first question but you have to deliver this message to them.  They printed this morning that I am the father of 17-year-old triplet girls.  My 17-year-old daughter really wishes that were happy -- really wishes that had happened, but my two 17-year-old sons are upset.  (Laughter.)  So if you could clarify that, that would be great.  And I’ll give you the first questions, if you’ve got one.  
So go ahead.
Q    We’re not great at math, obviously, at the New York Times.  
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  The math is right, it’s actually the gender that was wrong.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Sir, during the campaign President Trump, then candidate Trump, talked about the national debt, which of course has reached around $20 trillion.  You mentioned it in your budget message this morning.  Is there a plan, as the President talked about during last year’s campaign, to actually eliminate the national debt in eight years?  He said during the campaign it would be easy to actually eliminate the entire debt -- not the deficit, but the debt -- in eight years.  Is that something that this President is actually committed to trying to do?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  It’s a good question, it’s a fair question.  I would just suggest to you it’s not the right time for the question.  The budget blueprint, again, does not deal with the debt, it even doesn’t deal with the deficit.  It is simply the first part of the appropriations process.  We’ll send this up to the Hill now, and the Appropriations Committees of the House and the Senate -- of course the House controls the power of the purse, the Senate -- excuse me, Congress controls the power of the purse.  And this will be the first step in that process.
We will start to address the issues of the longer-term deficit, longer-term debt in that larger budget.  And of course we’ll have to deal at that time with things like mandatory spending, tax policy, revenue flows to the government.  
So again, it’s a fair question, I just don’t think now is the time to ask the question.  
Q    The 28 percent that comes out of the State Department, I know that you’re leaving a lot of discretion to the people who are in charge there at all of these agencies for how to implement these cuts.  But how much is intended to come out of the foreign aid budget of that $10 billion?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  A lot of it.  As I’ve said before, one of the reasons that you’re seeing such a dramatic reduction in the State Department on a percentage basis is not that this President thinks that diplomacy is not important -- in fact, nothing could be further from the truth.  We’ve already seen that Secretary Tillerson has had a tremendous -- one diplomatic success already on the deal he cut with Iraq. 
The President believes in diplomacy, and we believe that this budget protects that core function of the State Department.  It just so happens that much of the foreign aid that the President talked about in campaign -- much of the money that goes to climate research, green energy, those types of things -- are actually in the State Department budget.  If those line items had been in the Department of Commerce, you would see Department of Commerce having gone down by a similarly large percentage.
So the answer to your question is that most of the cuts within the State Department try to focus directly on foreign aid.  
Yes, sir.
Q    Yes, the budget showed a 0.8 decrease for NASA, but you’ve also talked about in the administration using private companies such as SpaceX, for example, for more of that.  So does this show some -- is some of this going to be shifted over to the private sector?  And does this show a commitment on the administration’s part towards science and NASA?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  It does.  Again, if you go back and you do what we did, which is go back to the President’s speeches, the interviews he gave and just talking to him, we tried to identify his priorities.  And one of the things he told us was, look, I’m still interested in America being involved in space exploration.
So even though the overall topline number at NASA is reduced by a small fraction -- I think it’s 0.8 percent, as you mentioned -- individual line items that deal with specifically space exploration are actually plussed up.  And part of the intent there is to promote exactly what you just talked about.
Yes, sir.
Q    Two questions.  Your own experience in the House tells you that a lot of these cuts haven’t been voted for before.  Do you consider this budget an opening bid, and do you expect a lot of pushback, even from Republicans, on the specificity and the size of these cuts?  
And secondly, to take your point about the President’s words on the campaign, those of us who traveled around with him remember -- he said he didn’t want to touch Social Security, Medicare, the big entitlements.  The fact that that’s not in this budget, is that a signal that those programs are going to remain untouched?  And as the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget said, that ignores 70 percent of spending and 90 percent of its growth over the next decade.
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  I’ll deal with the second one first, which is the President is absolutely going to keep the promises he kept on the campaign trail.  Again, you will see no reference in Social Security here, no reference to Medicare here, no reference to Medicaid here or any of the other mandatory programs -- what some people call entitlement programs -- because that’s not what this budget is.
This is the discretionary part of the budget, half of which, as you know, is defense, and the other half is everything else, the alphabet soup of government.  So just because it’s not here doesn’t mean we’re dodging the issue.  You would never see in any budget blueprint that deals with the topline spending numbers Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid.
To your other question about it not being popular on the Hill -- yeah, I can recognize that.  I’ve been on the Hill enough to know that some of these would be very unpopular.  Keep in mind the President is in a unique position.  I’ve been a member of Congress, I represented 700,000 people in South Carolina.  I had my constituency.  It was a district.  Senators represent an entire state.  We’re always dealing with special interests from back home, we’re dealing with lobbyists from back home.
The President is beholden to none of that.  The President has drafted a budget for the entire nation because that’s who he sees himself as representing.  He did not ask lobbyists for input on this, he did not ask special interests for input on this, and he certainly didn’t focus on how these programs might impact a specific congressional district.
But we knew that going into it.  And again, the message we’re sending to the Hill is we want more money for the things the President talked about, defense being the top one, national security, and we don’t want to add to the budget deficit.  If Congress has another way to do that we’re happy to talk to them about it.
Yes, sir, in the glasses.
Q    James Bays from Al Jazeera.  The United Nations said the world is currently facing the largest humanitarian crisis since the end of World War II -- 20 million people in just four countries facing starvation or famine.  And yet you're cutting funding to the U.N., cutting funding to the foreign aid budget.  Are you worried that some of the most vulnerable people on Earth will suffer as a result?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  We're absolutely reducing funding to the U.N. and to the various foreign aid programs, including those run by the U.N. and other agencies.  That should come as a surprise to no one who watched the campaign.  The President said specifically hundreds of time -- you covered him -- I'm going to spend less money on people overseas and more money on people back home.  And that's exactly what we're doing with this budget.
Yes, ma’am.
Q    Given your focus on dollar-for-dollar offsets in fiscal ’18, and for your fiscal 2017 request you didn’t insist on dollar-for-dollar offsets.  Why is that?  Why are you not concerned about adding to the deficit in fiscal 2017?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  The large part of the -- the point -- the question deals with the 2017 request, which is a $30 billion -- I think it's actually $3 billion -- a billion and a half in there for the wall.  And it's not entirely offset.  There’s a couple reasons for that.  One of them is time.  Another one is that some of that is what they call Overseas Contingency Operations.  Now, you also know that I have a somewhat colored history with the overseas contingency operation, but I will tell you that we went through this and made sure that the money that's being requested is true OCO -- means that it's focused truly on the areas where we're involved overseas, Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan, those types of places.
So we have sent them $18 billion worth of proposed reductions for 2017, but not all of them are offset.
Yes, ma’am.
Q    The President has called for eliminating funding for the Corporation for Public Broadcast and the National Endowment for the Arts.  If the Republican Congress sent the President appropriate bills that fund CPB and NEA, will he veto those bills and tell the Republican leadership to send bill that defunds those things?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  The message the President sent right now is that we want to defund those.  And there’s completely defensible reasons for doing that.  It's a simple message, by the way.  I put myself in the shoes of that steelworker in Ohio, the coal-mining family in West Virginia, the mother of two in Detroit, and I'm saying, okay, I have to go ask these folks for money and I have to tell them where I'm going to spend it.  Can I really go to those folks, look them in the eye and say, look, I want to take money from you and I want to give it to the Corporation of Public Broadcasting?  That is a really hard sell, in fact, some of you don't think we can defend anymore.
As to specific vetoes, you and I both know it doesn’t come over one by one, line item by line item doesn’t come over.  They come over in large appropriations bills.  And we'll work with Congress to go through the appropriations process and we'll make determinations on whether or not to sign appropriations bills or veto them at the appropriate time.
Yes, sir.
Q    There are several cases in the country where you're talking about eliminating some of these unauthorized programs. Are you laying down a marker there on unauthorized programs, and do you think spending discipline would be improved if Congress authorized everything that it is --
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  We hope so.  For those of you who aren't familiar with this, we actually spend a lot of money in the federal government that's on programs that aren't authorized at all.  Remember, spending is sort -- to break it down, it's sort of a three-step process to spend money.  You have to budget for it first.  Then you have to authorize it, and then you have to appropriate it.  But a lot of the programs that we've spent money on for years have been unauthorized spending.  Either they used to be authorized -- actually, most of them used to be authorized and then they simply lapsed.  And some of them were just never authorized in the first place.  They simply were appropriated without any authorization.
And, yeah, the message is that's not the right way to do it. In fact, we think that's the wrong way to do it.  You heard the President talk specifically on the campaign trail about at least 5 percent reductions for unauthorized programs, and that's what generated this budget.
Q    Director Mulvaney talked about this budget basically keeping the promises that the President made during the course of the campaign.  For Housing and Urban Development, this budget blueprint calls for a 13-percent reduction, $6 billion.  During the course of the campaign, President Trump said, specifically to urban black voters, he says, “What do you have to lose?  It turns out what they have to lose is at least $6 billion that goes to many programs that benefit those communities.  What do you say to those Americans who feel that?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Nobody is going to get kicked out of their houses.  What we did when we looked at the HUD budget was try to figure out a way to spend money better, and what we saw -- and I talked to Dr. Carson about this just today -- what we saw as we went through the analysis of the HUD budget is that a lot of their money got spent on government housing and building.  It's actually infrastructure.  And what Senator Carson -- what Secretary Carson and I talked about was figure out a way to do that better.  
And as we did that, what we realized was we are working on a large infrastructure program that we hope to roll out this summer.  And what Secretary Carson wants to do is take the money for the infrastructure that's in HUD right now -- and not very well run -- and move that into this larger program.
In fact, you’ll see the same line items -- or similar line items at the Department of Transportation for the same reason.  These do not mean the President is changing his commitment to infrastructure.  Again, far from it.  What we're saying is, look, for years and years we have built infrastructure like this and it doesn’t work very well --
Q    Well --
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Let me finish and I'll get back to you.  So what we're doing now is we're taking it out of the discretionary budget and we're going to move it into the larger infrastructure plan this summer.
Q    Housing and Urban Development and the Community Development Block Grants aren't exclusively about housing.  They support a variety of different programs, including, in part, Meals on Wheels, that affects a lot of Americans.  In Austin, Texas today, one organization there that delivers those meals to thousands of elderly says that those citizens will no longer be able to be provided those meals.  So what do you say to those Americans who are ultimately losing out?  Not on housing, but on other things that are taken out of that budget?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  As you know, or I think you know that Meals on Wheels is not a federal program.  It's part of that community -- the CDBG -- the block grants that we give to the states.  And then many states make the decision to use that money on Meals on Wheels.
Here’s what I can tell you about CDBGs because that's what we fund -- right? -- is that we spend $150 billion on those programs since the 1970s.  The CDBGs have been identified as programs since I believe the first -- actually, the second Bush administration as ones that were just not showing any results.  We can't do that anymore.  We can't spend money on programs just because they sound good.  And Meals on Wheels sounds great -- again, that's a state decision to fund that particular portion to.  But to take the federal money and give it to the states and say, look, we want to give you money for programs that don't work -- I can't defend that anymore.  We cannot defend that anymore.  We're $20 trillion in debt.
We're going to spend money, we're going to spend a lot of money, but we're not going to spend it on programs that cannot show that they actually deliver the promises that we've made to people.
Q    So you're talking about programs that do work or don't work.  There’s a program called the SHINE, and it's in Pennsylvania -- rural counties of Pennsylvania that provides after-school educational programs for individuals in those areas, which so happens to be the state that helped propel President Trump to the White House.  I'm curious to what you say to those Americans in the community where they tell me today that 800 individuals will no longer -- children, who need it most -- will no longer be provided, in those most-needed communities, that educational care they need.
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  I'm not familiar -- you all are at an advantage over me because I’d have to memorize all 4,000 line items.  So let’s talk about after-school programs, generally.  They’re supposed to be educational programs, right?  That's what they’re supposed to do.  They’re supposed to help kids who don't get fed at home get fed so they do better in school.  Guess what?  There’s no demonstrable evidence they’re actually doing that.  There’s no demonstrable evidence of actually helping results, helping kids do better in school, which is what -- when we took your money from you to say, look, we're going to go spend it on an after-school program.  The way we justified it was these programs are going to help these kids do better in school and get better jobs.  And we can't --
Q    To be clear, we're saying that --
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  -- prove that that's happening.
Q    To be clear, we're saying -- the administration, with this budget, is saying that no after-school programs out there are doing their job in helping educate these children?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  No, but I -- and again, now you're asking me a question I don't know the answer to, but I don't believe we cut all the funding for those types of things.  
Yes, sir.
Q    Just to follow up on that, you were talking about the steelworker in Ohio and the coalminer in Pennsylvania and so on. But those workers may have an elderly mother who depends on the Meals on Wheels program, who may have kids in Head Start.  And yesterday or the day before, you described this as a hard-power budget, but is it also a hard-hearted measure?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  No, I don't think so.  In fact, I think it's probably one of the most compassionate things we can do to actually be --
Q    Cut programs that help the elderly and kids?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  You're only focusing on half of the equation, right?  You're focusing on recipients of the money.  We're trying to focus on both the recipients of the money and the folks who give us the money in the first place.  And I think it's fairly compassionate to go to them and say, look, we're not going to ask you for your hard-earned money anymore.  A single mom of two in Detroit, okay -- "give us your money" -- we're not going to do that anymore unless we can guarantee --
Q    And that single mom has two kids -- what if that single mom has two kids in Head Start?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Let me finish.  Unless we can guarantee to you that that money is actually being used in a proper function.  And I think that is about as compassionate as you can get.  
Yes, ma’am.
Q    I have a question on the border wall.
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Sure.
Q    Thank you for doing this.  The budget, as I understand it, asked for $4.1 billion, so $1.5 [billion] for this year and $2.6 [billion] for the following year.  There’s no mention at all of whether or not Mexico is going to help pay for it or reimburse the U.S. for it, as the President pledged.  So where is that money coming from for the border wall?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  A couple of things.  Your number is correct -- it's $1.5 [billion] for 2017 -- back to your question about 2017 -- and I think $2.6 [billion] for 2018.  People have asked me a couple times, does that build the whole wall.  No, it doesn’t, but it gets us a start on the program and you'll see some of the wall being built this year, and then obviously increased funding in 2018.  But the wall will take longer than two years to build.  
As to the source of funds, that's up to the President and the Treasury and the State Department.  I'm the folks -- we're the guys at OMB and the gals at OMB who take the money that we have and allocate it in a budgetary process.  So it's up to somebody else to figure out where the money comes from. 
Yes, sir.
Q    Yes.  The budget for DOJ zeroes out reimbursements for state and local jails holding immigrants in the country illegally.  Some of that money now goes to sanctuary cities.  Is that part of the President’s promise to withhold funding from sanctuary cities?  And are there other elements of the budget intended to carry out that punishment that the President talked about?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Honestly, I'm not familiar with that particular line item, so let me deal with the DOJ like this -- and also Homeland, because there’s many pieces in Homeland that deal with this sort of topic.  You're going to see an increase in Homeland for an increase in detention facilities.  It's a fairly significant increase in detention facilities because we have -- the President has said he wants to stop the catch-and-release program.  In fact, he signed an executive order to do just that.  And we fund that; we increase the amount of money for detention facilities for folks who come into the country illegally.  
I'll give you a follow-up because I didn’t answer your first question very well.
Q    A question about the cuts you're making to things like transportation and housing.  You said those would be paid for later with other appropriations, but you said this would be balanced.  And I know you've been a fiscal hawk yourself.  It sounds like a bit of a shell game, though, where you're saying now this is a balanced budget, but you're saying you're not stopping to pay for other things because those will be paid for later.  But then where are you going to pay for those other things?  Eventually, doesn’t all this stuff have to get paid for?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  And just to clarify, it's not a balanced budget.  There will still be roughly a $488 billion deficit, according to the Congressional Budget Office, next year.  We simply didn’t add to that in order to spend more money on the President's priorities.  Regarding moving projects out of the, say, the base budgets for the agencies and into the infrastructure, the infrastructure program is something we've just recently started.  It won't probably come until summer or maybe even early fall.  We have to do Obamacare repeal and replace first, then tax reform second.  That leaves infrastructure probably third, which may come after the August recess in Congress.  
So you're making an assumption that I'm not willing to make.  You're making an assumption that all that infrastructure that we provide for later on in the year is going to go to the deficit, and I'm not willing to make that assumption.
Yes, sir.
Q    I have two short questions.  One, the budget blueprint provides robust funding for embassy security --
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Yes, sir.
Q    -- citing the Benghazi Accountability Review Board.  Does that mean there will be an increase, considering all the criticism that the President and Republicans levied against President Obama for supposedly cutting embassy security?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  That's one of those line items that we leave up to Secretary Tillerson.  He and I talked about the State Department budget and how he decides to allocate that.  It may be that there are some embassies that don’t need a lot more security and some that do.  So we give him the flexibility to do that.
The gentleman in the back had a question.
Q    Many countries around the world didn’t take seriously President Trump that he would cut the foreign aid, because most of the countries getting U.S. aid were not with the U.S. supporting terrorism against the U.S., and also they were not working with the U.S.  So how does President Trump feel now about those countries?  Will they continue the aid?  Because U.S. taxpayers will be asking that we don’t have to spend on those countries who are against the U.S.
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Again, I come back to what the President said on the campaign, which is that he's going to spend less money overseas.
To your question, though -- because this came up the other day -- which is the hard power versus soft power.  There is a very deliberate attempt here to send a message to our allies and our friends, such as India, and our adversaries with other countries, shall we say, which is that this is hard-power budget, that this administration tends to change course from a soft-power budget to a hard-power budget, and that's a message that our adversaries and our allies alike should take.
I'll take one more, because I'm sort of running down.  Yes, ma'am.
Q    Can you explain a little bit more about what message the President is trying to send by eliminating a lot of funding for science and climate change research, as you mentioned earlier?  And just a follow-up later when you get a chance.
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Sure.  A couple different messages.  When we talked about science and climate change, let's deal with them separately.  On science, we're going to function -- we're going to focus on the core function.  There's reductions, for example, I think, in the NIH -- the National Institutes of Health.  Why?  Because we think there's been mission creep, we think they do things that are outside their core functions.  We think there's tremendous opportunity for savings.  We recommend, for example, that a couple of facilities be combined; there would be cost savings from that.  
Again, this comes back to the President's business person view of government, which is if you took over this as a CEO, and you’d look at this on a spreadsheet and go, why do we have all of these facilities -- why do we have seven when we can do the same job with three, won't that save money?  And the answer is, yes.  So part of your answer is focusing on efficiencies and focusing on doing what we do better.
Regarding the question as to climate change, I think the President was fairly straightforward -- we're not spending money on that anymore; we consider that to be a waste of your money to go out and do that.  So that is a specific tie to his campaign.
Q    A follow-up --
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Yes, I'm sorry, you had a follow-up.
Q    Just really quick on Meals on Wheels.  You mentioned that it's one of those programs that's determined had not been doing its job effectively.  What evidence are you using to make that statement?  And is not feeding seniors in and of itself the fulfillment of the --
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  And my understanding from having been in the state government -- and I may have this wrong; I've been wrong several times today -- this may not be the first time.  But my understanding of Meals on Wheels is that that is a state determination.  The federal government doesn’t directly fund that; it funds the central Community Development Block Grants, the CDBGs.  And some states choose to take the money and do Meals and Wheels.  Other states and localities might choose to do something else with them.  We look at the CDBGs.  And when we do that, we look at this as $150 billion spent over 40 years, without the appreciable benefits to show for that type of taxpayer expenditure.  And that's why we have the reduction.
Q    May I follow up on that?
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  No, because I'm going to -- how Sean does this every day for an hour and a half, I have no idea.  (Laughter.)  But I'm going to --
MR. SPICER:  No, keep going.  (Laughter.)  
DIRECTOR MULVANEY:  Yeah, exactly.  (Laughter.)  I've been up since 4:00 a.m. this morning, so I'm going to turn it back over to Sean.  Thank you very much.  And we'll talk to you all soon.
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, guys.  Anyway, so to kick it off, Jonathan Karl.
Q    So, Sean, the day before yesterday you said you were extremely confident that the House and Senate Intelligence Committees would ultimately vindicate the President's allegation that Trump Tower was wiretapped.  As I'm sure you have now seen, the Senate Intelligence Committee has said they see no indications Trump Tower was the subject of surveillance.  That seems to be a pretty blanket statement.  What's your reaction?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think there's several things.  It's interesting to me that, just as a point of interest, that when one entity says one thing that proves -- that claims one things, you guys cover it ad nauseam.  When Devin Nunes came out and said, I think it's very possible -- yesterday -- it was crickets from you guys.  When Devin Nunes came out and said there was no connection that he saw to Russia -- crickets.  When Tom Cotton said the same. You don't want to cover the stuff --
Q    Devin Nunes said he saw no evidence of wiretapping at Trump Tower.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, hold on -- actually -- 
Q    Now you've had the House Intelligence Committee and the Senate Intelligence Committee --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, actually here’s his quote, Jonathan.  No, here’s the direct quote:  “I think it’s very possible.”
That's what he said when he said the President’s communications could have been swept up in collection.
So again --
Q    He said there was no -- "I saw no indication of wiretapping" -- no evidence of wiretapping. 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And I think the President has been very clear when he talked about this -- and he talked about it last night -- when he talked about wiretapping he meant surveillance, and that there have been incidents that have occurred.  Devin Nunes couldn’t have stated it more beautifully.  But you choose not to cover that part.  
You chose not to cover when Tom Cotton went out, when Richard Burr went out, when others -- Chairmen Nunes and others -- and said that there was no -- hold on --
Q    Well, the Senate Intelligence Committee is saying point blank -- they say no evidence of surveillance.    
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, Jonathan.  And where was your passion, and where was your concern when they all said that there was no connection to Russia?  Where was it then?  Crickets from you guys.  
Because at the end of the day when -- 
Q    So you're saying the President stands by his allegation that President Obama wiretapped the Trump Tower?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, hold on.  Hold on.  I’m making a point.  The point is this:  Number one, that it’s interesting how when evidence comes out and people who have been briefed on the Russia connection come out and say that there was nothing that they have seen that proves a connection, you choose not to cover that, you don't stop the narrative, you continue to perpetuate a false narrative.
When he came out yesterday and said, “I see no evidence that this happened”; when he said, “I think it’s very possible, but like I said, we should know later,” you don't cover that part.  You only cover the parts that -- but let’s go through what we do know.  Okay?  
Q    I want you to respond to the Senate Intelligence Committee.  
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, hold on, let me -- and I am trying to answer your question, Jonathan, if you can calm down.
If you look at what The New York Times reported on January 12th, 2017, they said, “In its final days, the Obama administration has expanded the power of the National Security Agency to share globally intercepted personal communications with the government’s 16 other intelligence agencies before applying privacy protections.  The new rules significantly relax longstanding limits on what the NSA may do with the information gathered by its most powerful surveillance operation, which are largely unregulated by wiretapping laws.”

When Sara Carter reported that "by the start of the new year, it brought with it unexpected politicizing of the intelligence gathered in secret.  Separately, the Obama administration amended a longstanding executive order, allowing information intercepted through FISA warrants or by the National Security Agency to be shared by a wider audience and 16 government agencies as Obama was leave office, intelligence normally reserved for just a handful of intelligence leaders was spread throughout briefings to scores of workers, and soon leaks began appearing in news media office organizations, often in stories lacking context of how national security investigations are actually concluded."
On March 3rd, Fox News chief anchor Bret Baier said that the following:  "There was a report in June 2016 -- a FISA request by the Obama administration -- Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court -- to monitor communications involving Donald Trump and several other campaign officials.  Then they got turned down.  Then in October, then they renewed it and did a startup wiretap at Trump Tower with some computer and Russian banks."  Baier continues, “A June FISA request that foreign intelligence surveillance courts gets shot down.  A judge says” -- hold -- Jonathan, I’m going to -- you can ask -- you can follow up -- “A judge says no-go to monitoring Trump Tower.  They go back in October.  They do get a FISA granted.  This is wiretap going on and a monitoring of computers that have some ties, they believe, to Russian accounts.  By all accounts, they don’t come up with anything in the investigation, but the investigation continues and we don’t know it.
On November 11th, 2016, days after the election, Heat Street reported, “Two separate sources with links to the counter-intelligence community had confirmed to Heat Street that the FBI sought and was granted a FISA warrant in October, giving counter-surveillance intelligence permission to examine the activities of U.S. persons in Donald Trump’s campaign with ties to Russia.  The first request, which sources say named Trump, was denied back in June.  But the second was drawn more narrowly and granted in October after evidence was presented of a server, possibly related to the Trump campaign and its alleged links to two banks -- SVB bank and Russia’s Alfa-Bank.  Sources suggest that a FISA warrant was granted to look at the full context of related documents that concern U.S. persons.  Two separate sources with links to the counter-intelligence community have confirmed that the FBI sought and was granted a FISA warrant in October giving counter-intelligence permission to examine the activity of U.S. persons in Donald Trump’s campaign with ties to Russia.”
They go on:  “The FISA warrant was granted in connection with investigation of suspected activities between the server and two banks.  However, it is thought that the intelligence community that the warrant covers any U.S. person connected to this U.N. investigation, and thus covers Donald Trump and at least three further men who have either formed part of his campaign or acted as media surrogates.”
On January 19th, the New York Times reported the following:  “American law enforcement and intelligence agencies are examining intercepted communication and financial transactions as part of a broad investigation of possible links between Russian officials and associates of President-elect Donald J. Trump.  One official said intelligence reports based on some of the wiretapped communications have been provided to the White House.  It is unclear which Russian officials under investigation or what particular conversations caught the attention of American eavesdroppers.  The legal standard for opening these investigations is low.
Andy McCarthy, writing in National Review, suggested:  “From three reports, from the Guardian, Heat Street and the New York Times, it appears the FBI has concerns about a private server in Trump Tower that was connected to one or two Russian banks.  Heat Street describes these concerns as centering on “possible financial and banking offenses.”  This is his quote -- “I italicized the word “offenses” because it denotes crimes.  Ordinarily, when crimes are suspected, there is a criminal investigation, not a national security investigation.”
We go on.  Sara Carter from Circa, reporting, “Intelligence professionals tell Circa News they were concerned that some of the Russian intelligence was spread through group briefings to a much-larger-than-usual audience back in January.  This would have happened during the final days of the Obama administration when it expanded executive order 12333, which allows employees with a “need to know” have further unfettered access to raw data stowed by the NSA.  The new rules allowed the NSA to share “raw signals intelligence information, including the names of those involved in phone conversations and emails.  The expansion of the order makes it difficult to narrow in on the leaks and, frankly, it allows too many people access to the raw data, which only used to be available to a select few, said a U.S. official who spoke on the condition of anonymity and was not granted to speak on the authority.  Numerous outlets, including the New York Times, have reported on the FBI investigation into Mr. Trump’s advisors; BBC, and then McClatchy revealed the existence of a multi-agency working group to coordinate investigations across the thing.  
On February 14th, the New York Times again refers to phone record and intercepted calls -- let me quote them -- “American law enforcement intelligence agency intercepted the communications around the same times they were discovering the evidence that Russia was trying to disrupt the presidential election by hacking into the Democratic National Committee, three officials said.  
The intelligence agencies then thought to learn whether the Trump campaign was colluding with the Russians on hacking or other efforts to influence the election.  The officials interviewed in recent weeks said that so far they have seen no evidence of such cooperation.  The official said that the intercepted communications are not limited to Trump campaign officials and other associates of Mr. Trump.  The call logs and intercepted communications are part of a larger trove of information that the FBI is sifting through.
Days later, the New York Times then reports, “In the Obama administration’s last days, some White House officials scrambled to spread information about Russian efforts to undermine the presidential election of Donald Trump, connections between the President-elect and Russians across the government.  But the increasingly hard-to-escape conclusion that in our government -- that individuals in our government were instead trying to undermine the new President by saying, quote -- this is the New York Times again -- “At intelligence agencies, there was a push to process as much raw intelligence in a possible analysis to keep the report at relatively low classification levels to ensure a widespread readership across the government.  And in some cases, “among them, European allies.”  This allowed the upload of as much information -- intelligence as possible to Intellipedia, a secret Wiki used by American analysts to share information.  
Sean Hannity went on Fox to say, “But protections which are known as minimization procedures have been put in place to protect Americans that are not under warrant, American citizens that are caught up in their surveillance.”  And, “By the way, their identities are protected.  Their constitutional rights are protected.  Now, of course, this was not the case with Lieutenant General Flynn, because a transcript of his call was created and then given to intelligence officials who then leaked this information, which is a felony, to the press that printed it.”
Last, on Fox News on March 14th, Judge Andrew Napolitano made the following statement.  “Three intelligence sources have informed Fox News that President Obama went outside the chain of command.  He didn’t use the NSA, he didn’t use the CIA, he didn’t use the FBI, and he didn’t use the Department of Justice.  He used GCHQ, what is that?  It’s the initials for the British Intelligence Spying Agency.  So simply, by having two people saying to them, ‘the President needs transcripts of conversations involved in candidate Trump’s conversations involving President-elect Trump,’ he was able to get it and there’s no American fingerprints on this.”
Putting the published accounts and common sense together, this leads to a lot.
Q    So, Sean, are you saying that despite the findings, the bipartisan findings of the Senate Intelligence Committee --
MR. SPICER:  No, they’re not findings.  There’s a statement out today.  They have not begun this -- as you know, yesterday, or two days ago, the Department of Justice asked for an additional week.  So the statement clearly says that at this time, that they don’t believe that.  They have yet to go through the information.  The Department of Justice, as you know, has not supplied this.  
But I’ve just read off to you -- it’s interesting, when the New York Times reports --
Q    I let you do that whole long answer.  Can I just ask my question?
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  Appreciate it.
Q    Okay.  So are you saying that the President still stands by his allegation that President Obama ordered wiretapping or surveillance of Trump Tower, despite the fact that the Senate Intelligence Committee says they see no indication that it happened?  Does the President still stand by the allegation?
MR. SPICER:  No, but -- first of all, he stands by it, but again, you’re mischaracterizing what happened today.  
Q    No, the Senate has no indication.  I’m reading exactly from their statement.  
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And at the same time, they acknowledge that they have not been in contact with the Department of Justice.  Again, I’d go back to what I said at the beginning.  It’s interesting --
Q    They’ve been briefed by the FBI Director.  They've been --  
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  It’s interesting how at the same time, where were you coming to the defense of that same intelligence committee and those members when they said there was no connection to Russia?  You didn’t seem to report it then.  There was no --
Q    Because -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, so you want -- hold on, you want to comment and you want to perpetuate a false narrative.
Q    Actually, I did report that Clapper said that.  I actually did.  
MR. SPICER:  But when those individuals have gone out time and time again, when Chairman Nunes has said, number one, that there was no information that he’s aware of that that existed, that got zero reporting.  Number two, when he went out yesterday and said, “I think it’s very possible,” you don’t include that in the question mark.
The bottom line is, is that the President said last night that he will be -- that there will be additional information coming forward.  There’s a ton of media reports out there that indicate that something was going on during the 26 [2016] election.  And I think it’s interesting, where was the question of the New York Times or these other outlets when that was going on?  Where was the question --
Q    So he’ll be vindicated.  You think he’s going to be vindicated.
MR. SPICER:  I believe he will.  
Jim.
Q    Yeah, you were just quoting Sean Hannity there.  The House and Senate intelligence committees are quoting the FBI Director.  You’re citing Sean Hannity and Andrew Napolitano.
MR. SPICER:  I also quoted -- I get you’re going to cherry-pick -- no, no, okay, you also tend to overlook all of the other sources that -- because I know you want to cherry-pick it.  But at the -- no, no, but you do.  But where was your concern about the New York Times reporting?  You didn’t seem to have a concern with that.
Q    We have done plenty of reporting on all of this, Sean. 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, but you want to cherry-pick one piece of commentary --
Q    These connections between the aides of the President -- associates of the President to the Russians has all been looked at and it’s --
MR. SPICER:  No, wait, how do you know all this?  How do you seem to be such an expert on this?  
Q    I’m saying that this has been looked at, Sean.  We've all looked at it.  
MR. SPICER:  How do you know it’s been looked at?
Q    There have been --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, hold on, where is -- I’m sorry, I’m afraid to understand -- can you tell me how you know that all of this has “been looked at”?
Q    You’re asking me whether or not it’s been looked at?
MR. SPICER:  You made a statement, you said, “All of this has been looked at.”
Q    Our outlet, other outlets have reported --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, so -- okay, so when your outlet says it’s all been looked at --
Q    -- on contacts between associates and aides of the President and the Russians during the 2016 campaign.  It sounds like during the context of that investigation there might have been some intercepted communications.  The House Intelligence Committee Chairman did mention that, and we have reported that, others have reported that on our air and in various publications.  But, Sean, what you are refusing to answer -- the question that you’re refusing to answer is whether or not the President still believes what he believes --
MR. SPICER:  No, I’m not -- I just said to Jonathan.  I didn’t refuse --
Q    But you have a Senate and House Intelligence Committee, both leaders from both parties on both of those panels saying that they don’t see any evidence of any wiretapping.  So how can the President go on and continue to say these things?
MR. SPICER:  Because that’s not -- because you’re mischaracterizing what Chairman Nunes said.  He said, “I think it’s possible” -- he’s following up on this.  So to suggest that is actually -- and you’re stating unequivocally that you somehow --
Q    He said, if you take the President literally -- he said, if you take the President literally, he is wrong.
MR. SPICER:  Right, and I think that we’ve already cleared that up.  And he said exactly that.  But the President has already said clearly when he referred to wiretapping he was referring to surveillance.
Q    Right, but it sounds like, Sean, that you and the President are saying now, well, we don’t mean wiretapping anymore because that’s not true anymore, so now we’re going to expand that to other forms of surveillance.  What’s it going to be next?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, Jim, I think that’s cute, but at the end of the day -- we’ve talked about this for three or four days.  The President had “wiretapping” in quotes; he was referring to broad surveillance.  And now you’re basically going back.  We talked about this several days ago.  
The bottom line is, is that the investigation by the House and the Senate has not been provided all of the information.  And when it does -- 
Q    It sounds like your information is news reports, not evidence, not conversations with the FBI Director.  
MR. SPICER:  No, no, what -- I think the President addressed that last night.  He said there’s more to come.  These are merely pointing out that I think there is widespread reporting that throughout the 2016 election there was surveillance that was done on a variety of people that came up.
Q    There was an investigation going on into whether there were contacts between the President’s campaign and the Russians.  Of course, they’re going to be looking at these various things.  I mean, isn’t that right?  
MR. SPICER:  I get it.  Somehow you seem to believe that you have all of this information, you’ve been read in on all of these things, which I find very interesting.
Q    I haven’t been read in by the FBI Director, but the House and Senate Intelligence Committees have been.
MR. SPICER:  Well, no, you’re coming to some serious conclusions for a guy that has zero intelligence -- (laughter) -- 
Q    Give me some credit, Sean.   
MR. SPICER:  I’ll give you some --
Q    A little intelligence maybe.  But no, what I’m saying is that --
MR. SPICER:  Clearance.  I wasn’t done.  Clearance.  Maybe both.
Q    Well, come on, now.  Those two panels have spoken with the FBI Director and have been told there’s no evidence of this.  So why not just -- why can’t we just end this farce and just have the President say he was wrong?
MR. SPICER:  Okay, I think this question has been asked and answered, Jim.  It’s interesting how you jump to all of these conclusions about what they have and what they don’t have, and you seem to know all the answers.  But at the end of the day, there was clearly a ton of reporting --
Q    So a week from now, we're going to be wrong, you're going to be right?
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, Jim.  Let me answer -- I think that there has been a vast amount of reporting, which I just detailed, about activity that was going on in the 2016 election.  There’s no question that there was surveillance techniques used throughout this I think by a variety of outlets that have reported this activity concluded. 
And I think when you actually ask those two people whether or not -- and as Chairman Nunes said yesterday, when you take it literally and -- wiretapping, the President has already been very clear that he didn’t mean specifically wiretapping.  He had it in quotes.  So I think to fall back on that is a false premise.  That’s not what he said.  He was very clear about that when he talked about it yesterday. 
Major.
Q    So just to be clear, you’re good and the President is good with stories that have anonymous sources in them.
MR. SPICER:  No, it’s interesting -- I think when it comes to the Russia story, and the on-the-record sources who have been briefed by the FBI continue to conclude that there’s nothing there, you guys continue to fall back on these anonymous sources and perpetuate a false narrative.  And yet when it comes to us talking about all these reports in there, you then criticize the anonymous sources.
Q    I'm just asking.  
MR. SPICER:  No, it’s just interesting that sort of the double standard that exists when it comes to us citing stories when it comes -- and then how you intend to use them.
Q    So let me ask you what the President said last night.  He was asked by Tucker Carlson -- "you’re in charge of the various intelligence apparatus that report to you.  You can ask them."  And he said --
MR. SPICER:  And again -- 
Q    Can I ask my question?  
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.
Q    He said he was reluctant to do that.  So let me just put two things together.  Earlier this week, you told us, when asked, "Has the President directed the Justice Department to collect and distribute information to the various relevant congressional committees?"  If I remember your answer correctly, it was, "No, we hadn’t given that specific direction."  Has that changed?  
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    Has he now directed the Justice Department?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    And is he asking, himself, for the intelligence agencies that report to him, to provide him specific answers to these underlying questions that are separate from the reports you’re citing?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    Why not?
MR. SPICER:  Because I think -- we’ve covered this before.  I think that gets into interfering, and I think that the appropriate process is to allow the House and the Senate to do this so that it doesn’t appear as though we’re interfering --
Q    But interfering -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  But I mentioned to you this the other day, Major.  If we go ask them, then you’re going to turn around and say, you guys interfered with something and you pressured them.  It’s a catch-22 for us.  And the bottom line is, is that I think the President made it clear two Sundays ago that he wanted the House and Senate Intelligence Committee to work with these agencies to collect the information and make a report.  
That’s what we’re doing, in order to make sure that there is a separation from us so that you can’t turn around and then accuse us of forcing or pressuring an agency to produce a document.  We’re asking them to go through the process of the separation of powers, and actually going to those different entities.  The Department of Justice said, yesterday, that they want an additional week, and we’re allowing that process to play through. 
Got it?  Abby.
Q    Sean, is the President making these statements based on classified information?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to get into what how the President makes a decision.  I think that what I think is clear though is -- through the reporting that I just read -- is that there’s clearly widespread open-source material pointing to surveillance that was conducted during the 2016 election.
Q    (Inaudible) that that information is available to members of the House and the Senate.  It’s public, as you noted.  They are looking at that same information, and they came to the conclusion that they have not seen --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, that’s not true.
Q    -- any evidence to back up the President’s claim.  So if there is other information, why won’t the President release it?
MR. SPICER:  Again, I’m not going to get into that yet.  I think the President discussed that last night on his interview, and we’ll let the process play out.  I understand what he discussed --
Q    He discussed these reports -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand what he discussed.  They have clearances in the House and the Senate Intelligence Committees.  They’re able to conduct this.
Alexis.
Q    Sean, I’d like to ask you about two topics, but can you help us a little by calling on Peter right now?  
MR. SPICER:  No, I’m going to --
Q    Call it --
MR. SPICER:  I understand.  I actually call the question.  Alexis, if you don’t want to answer the question I can call on somebody else.
Q    Could you call on the New York Times, please?
MR. SPICER:  No, thank you.  Gabi.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  In the case that Judge Watson issued against the restraining order against Trump’s second travel -- sorry, the President’s second travel ban, he included one of the President’s tweets and this was also included in the Washington State case.  So I’m wondering, does it give the President any pause that this virtual paper trail is creating -- is having an impact on advancing his agenda?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean, I think that the Department of Justice’s statement speaks for itself when it comes to that last night.  But the federal law that I read out clearly gives the President the authority.  This is what we argued during the first one.  I think for a judge to ignore that statute and talk about tweets or interpreting something that happened during the campaign trail is not in keeping with how they’re supposed to interpret the law.  I’m not going to continue to comment.
We tailored that additional -- that second executive order to comply with the judge’s order.  I think -- so to go back now and to say, well, based on how the first order was conceived makes absolutely no sense.  But I’m going to let the Department of Justice litigate that, how they do it.
The second order literally was tailored to the concerns that were rendered by the 9th Circuit in the first executive order.  So for them to then turn around the make arguments that are non-germane seems kind of odd.  But I’ll let the Department of Justice do that.
Zeke.
Q    Is the President concerned that comments made by his staff came up in this lawsuit?  It shows comments by Stephen Miller, saying that the second travel ban would have roughly the same policy outcome as the first, that was the intent that that was used by the judge in that case to sort of -- to get that (inaudible) yesterday.  Is he concerned that there’s mixed messaging coming out of the West Wing on this ban?
MR. SPICER:  No, he’s not.  And I think that the Department of Justice will be pursuing avenues that will seek to remedy this.  I think when you read through the court’s ruling in Hawaii in particular, it just doesn’t seem to make sense.
As I mentioned to Gabi, the second executive order was literally tailored.  So to go back and talk about statements that occurred, in some cases, well before even the first one, seems to not be an accurate reading of the law.  But I’ll let the Department of Justice be the ones that argue this and make the appropriate legal argument.
Hunter.  Olivier, I’m sorry.
Q    I have one more for you.  To go back to your long list of sort of news reports you mentioned -- one that you reached that perhaps the GCHQ was involved.  Did the President ever raise this in his conversation with Theresa May?  And if that were to pan out, would that imperil the special relationship between the two?
MR. SPICER:  Again, these are just -- that happened I think two days ago.  It was something that was reported on air.  I think the point is, is that there’s been --
Q    Was it raised -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, it has not been raised.  But I do think that, again, we’re not -- all we’re doing is literally reading off what other stations and people have reported, and I think that casts into concern some of the activities that may have occurred during the ’16 election.  We’re not casting judgment on that.  I think the idea is to say that if these organizations, these individuals came to these conclusions, they merit looking into.
Olivier.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  I got a couple for you.  There’s a news report about the President’s meeting with the Saudi Defense Minister/Deputy Crown Prince that says that the defense minister told the President about a plot, a terrorist plot against the United States.  Did that happen?  What’s the nature of that?  How worried should Americans be?
MR. SPICER:  We’re obviously never going to comment on any kind of specific threats to the homeland.  We’re obviously committed to ensuring the safety of every American.  But it should be no secret that we share intelligence amongst a variety of countries, and so we would never comment on a potential threat or not that existed.  But we appreciate several countries that we work with closely to make sure that we do what we can to protect the homeland.
Q    One more.  Secretary Tillerson in Asia said that 20 years of diplomatic efforts have failed to get North Korea to denuclearize.  That’s plainly true, but the question I guess that comes up is does the President plan a break from diplomacy altogether?  Are we looking now at only the use of force or some other coercive measures?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to comment.  I think the President never takes anything off the table.  That’s something he’s been very clear about, and -- with that.  
Blake.
Q    Sean, over the course of the campaign the President made a couple different -- many comments about the budget and the deficit.  At one point, he said he thought that he could get rid of the national debt over the course of eight years.  At another point he said that he would insist on a balanced budget relatively soon.  Now the base line that the administration is giving us is, well at least we’re not adding onto the deficit, which is nearly half a trillion dollars.  So I’m curious as to how we got from that point to now, to where -- he was talking at one point about eliminating a bunch, and now it’s adding onto it.
MR. SPICER:  I think Director Mulvaney addressed that.  I think -- look, a couple things.  Number one, the Senate dragged its feet on getting Director Mulvaney confirmed and in office.  So I think we were way -- we were behind the curve in having a director of OMB.  We got in here -- I think we produced a blueprint that is consistent with the President’s principles and priorities.  But he’s already made it very clear that we'll have a budget probably sometime in May that will outline the more specifics of the revenue piece, the entitlement piece, and the full details of all this.
But eliminating a $20 trillion debt and tackling the current deficit is something that's going to take a little bit of time and something that the President is committed to reducing.  I think we've talked very extensively about the President’s commitment to protecting taxpayer dollars and using them more efficiently.  This budget and a lot of the action the President took on other projects, including the F18 and the next generation of AF1, show that the President is committed on a very, very personal basis to getting involved in programs and policies to reduce the deficit and respect taxpayer money.  So this is step one, and it's a down payment on that goal.
Q    Are there future steps -- there are lots of cuts in here, but no matter which way you splice the numbers, anyone will tell you, if you want to drop it somehow you’ve got to get to entitlements.
MR. SPICER:  I understand.
Q    Is that on the table potentially, yes or no?
MR. SPICER:  As Director Mulvaney put it, he was chosen for this job because of his commitment to fiscal austerity and respect of taxpayer dollars and budgeting skills.  And I think that we've got to get passed today.  Let us get down that and we'll have more for you.
But again, I think this budget is a huge down payment on the President’s goal of showing his commitment to fiscal responsibility and respecting the taxpayer.
Eamon.
Q    Sean, tax day is coming up.  A lot of Americans put together their tax returns.  When the President puts together his tax returns this year, will he release it publicly?  Presumably he's not under audit, right?
MR. SPICER:  Well, St. Patrick’s Day is tomorrow -- that's what I'm more focused on.  
Q    Presumably, his 2016 returns are not under audit yet.  
MR. SPICER:  Right.  Again, we'll cross that bridge when it comes to it.  I think the President has been very clear about his position on his tax returns, and we'll have to see where it goes from there.  But the President has been very clear throughout the campaign and consistent that he’s under a routine audit.
John.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Reading the draft of the budget and listening to Director Mulvaney’s comments yesterday and today, it would appear that the National Endowment of the Arts would be phased out entirely in two years.  Can you name any other government programs or even Cabinet departments -- such as Housing and Urban Development, and Education -- in which its entire function may be phased out or reduced to another agency in government or even the state?
MR. SPICER:  John, those here from OMB is the appropriate person to ask on that.  I know that they’ve done several briefings on the budget.  We can have OMB definitely get back to you on this.  If you can contact him after this.
Kaitlan.
Q    Going back to the fact that the President used “wiretap” in quotes, and last night he said it was very important that it was in quotes, but out of the four tweets when he accuses Barack Obama of wiretapping him he only used quotes in two of them.  In two of them he specifically said that he tapped his phones.  He didn’t use the term, wiretapping.  And just minutes ago, you said it was communications being swept up.  So can you definitively say that he still feels like Barack Obama wiretapped Trump Tower, or does he feel like it was broadly surveilled?  Which is it?
MR. SPICER:  Look, he was very clear about this last night.  He talked about it, as you said --
Q    He wasn’t --
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, he was.  He said that he meant it, he put it in quotes, it was very broad.  And so that's what he meant by the use of the term.  
Q    But was it phone-tapping?  Was it --
MR. SPICER:  No, it was surveillance.  I think we've covered this like 10 times.
Q    There's no specific answer of what it was.  What did President Obama do to --
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, but that's the point of them looking into this, Kaitlan.  I think the idea is to look into this, have the House and Senate Intelligence Committees look into this and report back.
Q    I want to follow up on that.  If all this comes out and there’s no proof that President Obama had any role in any wiretapping, if there was no wiretapping, will President Trump then offer an apology to President Obama?
MR. SPICER:  I was asked this like three times this week and I think the answer is we're not going to prejudge what the outcome of this is.  I think we've got to let the process work its will, and then when there’s a report that comes out conclusive from there, then we'll be able to comment.  But to jump ahead of this process at this point would be inappropriate.
And I go to Bryan Crabtree of Salem Radio, Georgia. 
Q    Thank you, Sean, for taking questions from a talk-radio host right here in Georgia and not in the D.C. swamp.  First, I have two questions.  First, to the President’s tax returns and classified information.  President Trump campaigned on draining the swamp.  The American people then want to know why he (inaudible).  And Commissioner (inaudible) has not yet been fired by the Trump administration.  My second question is with regard to there are -- many conservatives are really concerned that Paul Ryan, the Speaker of the House, is leading President Trump down a very wrong path on healthcare.  How do you react to that?
MR. SPICER:  Well, on the first one, there's no personnel updates with respect to -- with the exception of the ones that I mentioned today.  
On the second, Donald Trump is not one to be led down a path by anyone.  I think he is -- he talked today at the lunch with the Taoiseach and Speaker Ryan that he’s working hand-in-glove with the Speaker.  He talked about it last night.  This is a commitment that he has to enacting healthcare.  This is a process that he is committed to, wants to see through because of a goal that he wants to achieve, which is making a more patient-centric healthcare system that lowers the cost and increases the options.
But he doesn’t get led down any path.  He leads very clearly.  And I think if you listen to Speaker Ryan today, he’s in agreement that there’s been a strong partnership between the House, the administration and I think the Senate so far to make sure that we get this bill done.  And that's what our goal is going to be, and that's -- so I would argue that we've actually done a pretty good job of getting that done.
Jonathan.
Q    I want to ask you about the decision to cut the National Institutes of Health budget by 19 percent.  It's, as you know, a very important part of the government funding medical research.  Budget Director Mulvaney yesterday acknowledged that the private sector can't fill that gap.  When there are rare diseases, we do need a really robust government presence.  The President invited a rare-disease patient to his speech to Congress to talk about medical innovation.  How do you square those things when you're cutting NIH by 19 percent?  And many conservatives actually wanted to increase the budget.
MR. SPICER:  I think Director Mulvaney actually -- somebody asked him during the Q&A period the same question.
Q    But he suggested that it wouldn't -- like my take from listening to him yesterday was that it wouldn't be cut.  I mean, I almost wrote that.
MR. SPICER:  There’s this assumption in Washington, Jonathan, that if you get less money it's a cut.  And I think that the reality is that in a lot of these there’s efficiencies, duplicity, ways to spend money better.  And I think if you're wasting a lot of money, that’s not a true dollar spent.  And I think when you look at the way that Director Mulvaney and the President approached this budget, it was can we ask -- can we get more with the same dollar, can we find duplicity, can we find efficiencies, can we combine facilities in some cases at NIH to enhance a better experience whereby we actually have an outcome that’s reduced savings.
But to assume that because you spend a ton of dollars you’re going to get a better outcome, I mean, with all due respect, you look at the District of Columbia, they spend by far more per capita than any other city in the country on education, and I think they have tremendous issues that are constantly being dealt with in their education system.
So to assume that just because you throw money at a problem it’s somehow magically solved is a very Washington way of looking at a budget problem.
Q    But they believe -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, and I think part of the issues that we’re working -- as the Director outlined a couple weeks ago during the passback process, is to work with them to talk to each of these agencies and departments about how to walk through their budget in a way that ensures they can continue to do the core functions that they want while finding ways to reduce waste, get rid of -- enhance efficiencies and get rid of duplicity.
But that is a very Washington way of looking at a problem, when you say, let’s just look at how much we spend as a measure of how much we care or how much we’re going to get done.  And I think that the President has been very clear as to what his priorities on this budget are and the outcomes that we expect from every dollar that we spend.  
So for being in office for 55 days, or 50-some-odd days, whatever it’s been, we’ve had a unique ability to go forward so far and make a very strong commitment to enhancing our national security, to protect the country and to keep America safe and its citizens safe, while at the same time making sure that we don’t ask for people to work harder, to spend more to Washington -- send more to Washington that gets ultimately wasted.  I just don’t see how that’s showing respect to the American people or to the American taxpayer, especially when so many people are working two, sometimes three jobs, or both parents are working just to get by, pay the mortgage, and we’re saying, hey, don’t worry, keep sending more money to Washington -- and we’re not going to take the time.
But there should be a review of all these agencies.  Director Mulvaney was pointing out how many unauthorized agencies and departments and programs we have throughout the government.  If we’re going to do that, at some point there should be a debate on whether or not these agencies and programs are achieving their mission.  And if they are then great, fund them.  But if they’re not, we shouldn’t be asking hardworking American taxpayers to send more money to Washington to fund things that don’t further those goals.
Thank you guys very much.  I look forward to seeing you all tomorrow.  Take care.  Have a good one.
END
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 3/20/2017
James S. Brady Briefing Room

1:45 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon.  As you all know, the President will be speaking this afternoon in Louisville, and we've got an event coming up, so I'll try to keep this relatively short to focus on -- let the President focus on his message for the day.
In regard to the news of the day, this morning, after receiving his daily intelligence briefing, the President met with Bill Gates, the co-chair and trustee of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.  The President and Mr. Gates talked about their shared commitment to finding and stopping disease outbreaks around the world.  The President particularly commended Mr. Gates for the Gates Foundation's work in global health and health security.  Generous and innovative private philanthropy groups, like the Gates Foundation, are critical to our mission of finding the cures of tomorrow. 
Also this morning, the confirmation hearings in the Judiciary Committee began for the President’s nominee for the Supreme Court, Judge Neil Gorsuch.  As the judge will continue to show throughout this process, he's eminently qualified for this position, with impeccable academic credentials, a brilliant legal mind, and a proven commitment to the Constitution. 
On Tuesday and Wednesday, Judge Gorsuch will be questioned by each member of the panel.  And on Thursday, we anticipate things to conclude with a panel of witnesses.
The President was glad to see so many people convey their support in the last few days for Judge Gorsuch.  Just this past weekend, Senator Grassley, former New York Mayor Bloomberg, editorial boards from across the country, and several of his former colleagues and classmates either penned op-eds and editorials or provided comments, one way or another, stating his impeccable qualifications for the bench.
They add to the long list of jurists, politicians, and elected officials from both sides of the aisle who have already given the judge their support.  The President looks forward to watching Judge Gorsuch continue to show the Senate what an extraordinary addition he will be to the bench, and is confident that he will be confirmed.
Later in the morning, the President had a meeting with Speaker Ryan, Secretary of Health and Human Services Dr. Tom Price, and Dr. Zeke Emanuel.  Dr. Emanuel has been intimately involved in crafting healthcare policy since his work on Obamacare.  Obviously, he and the President have some differing views on the best way to make healthcare affordable and accessible, but the President also strongly believes that the health and wellbeing of the American people shouldn’t always be a partisan issue, and he will continue to reach across party lines and listen to voices on this issue.
Last week he heard from individuals and families who have suffered from the disastrous results of Obamacare.  He’s previously spoken to healthcare policy groups, Republican congressional leadership, and health insurance companies.  This week, he and his staff will have discussions on women in healthcare while continuing an open dialogue with members of Congress.  And he will be hosting even more meetings and listening sessions in the coming weeks as he works with Congress to bring commonsense reforms to our healthcare system.
The President has shown that he's willing to hear from all stakeholders in the healthcare field, and he will continue to listen as the process on the American Health Care Act moves along and we pursue the additional legislative and administrative actions necessary.
This afternoon, the President had lunch with the Vice President, and as we speak he's meeting with Secretary of State Tillerson.  The Secretary just returned from an important trip to Asia.  He made it clear that America is committed to our allies, Japan and the Republic of Korea, and that we expect China to increase its role in persuading North Korea to move away from nuclear weapon and ballistic missile development and toward steps to create a better future for the North Korean people. 
This trip set the stage for future leader-level engagement between the U.S. and China.  During this meeting, he will debrief the President on his trip.
Later this afternoon, the President will welcome Prime Minister al-Abadi of Iraq.  The Iraqi people have been a brave and steadfast partner in our shared fight against ISIS, al Qaeda, and radicalism.  The President will speak with the Prime Minister about how that partnership will help us defeat ISIS and move into a new era in which Iraq is a force for stability and peace and a prosperous Middle East.
After his bilateral meeting with the Prime Minister, the President will depart the White House for Louisville, Kentucky for a Make America Great Again Rally before returning to the White House later this evening.
A few notes at the end before I take some questions.
Yesterday, Treasury Secretary Mnuchin returned from a very successful trip to Europe, where he stopped in the UK for a bilateral with the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and later met with 18 of his counterparts during the G20 Ministerial in Baden-Baden.  
This trip gave the Secretary an opportunity to outline the administration's priorities on a number of issues, including macroeconomic policy, financial regulation, international tax, and illicit finance.  During the meetings, the Secretary and his counterparts presented a platform that will strengthen our collective work on steps to promote global growth and financial stability.
In terms of the schedule for the rest of the week -- tomorrow, the President will sign S. 442, “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration Transition Authorization Act of 2017” in the morning, and make remarks at the National Republican Congressional Committee March Dinner in the evening.
On Wednesday, as I mentioned last week, the President will meet with the Congressional Black Caucus.
On Thursday, the President will hold an event with truck drivers and representatives from the trucking companies and industry on healthcare and its negative impacts on their industry and livelihood, which just happens to be the largest employer in 29 states.
And on Friday, the President will hold a Greek Independence Day celebration.  We’ll have further updates on all of those events later.
And finally, I want to address the House Intelligence Committee hearing that is currently happening in which the FBI director and the NSA director are currently testifying and comment to the extent that I can at this time.  
This hearing, as Chairman Nunes noted, is the first of several that the House Intelligence Committee is engaged in, and the President is happy that they’re pursuing the facts in this.  As has been previously reported, Director Comey confirmed that the FBI is investigating Russia’s role in interfering with the election.  And let me just comment briefly on that.
Following this testimony, it’s clear that nothing has changed.  Senior Obama intelligence officials have gone on record to confirm that there is no evidence of a Trump-Russia collusion.  The Obama CIA director said so, Obama’s director of national intelligence said so, and we take them at their word.
However, there was some new information that came from the hearing that we believe is newsworthy about the intelligence-gathering process and the unmasking of Americans identified in intelligence reports, and the illegal leak of such unmasked individuals, which is a federal crime.  
Director Comey told the House Intelligence Committee that certain political appointees in the Obama administration had access to the names of unmasked U.S. citizens, such as senior White House officials, senior Department of Justice officials, and senior intelligence officials.  Before President Obama left office, Michael Flynn was unmasked and then illegally his identify was leaked out to media outlets, despite the fact that, as NSA Director Rogers said, that unmasking and revealing individuals endangers “national security."
Not only was General Flynn’s identify made available, Director Comey refused to answer the question of whether or not he’d actually briefed President Obama on his phone calls and activities.  Director Comey called these types of disclosures of classified information a threat to national security, and said he will investigate and pursue these matters to the full extent of law.  
He also said that the leaking of classified information had become “unusually active” in the timeframe in question.  It’s also important to note that both Directors Comey and Rogers told the committee that they have no evidence that votes were changed in the swing states the President had won. 
I think that pretty much, until we get the ending of this hearing -- I don’t know that I want to comment too much further.  And with that, I’d be glad to take a few questions.
Jonathan.
Q    Sean, does the President still have complete confidence in FBI Director Comey?
MR. SPICER:  There’s no reason to believe he doesn’t at this time.  
John.
Q    You said -- wait, hold on --
MR. SPICER:  I answered you.
Q    He said that there is no information to support the allegations that the President made against President Obama.
MR. SPICER:  At this time.
Q    So is the President prepared to withdraw that accusation and apologize to the President?
MR. SPICER:  No, we started a hearing.  It’s still ongoing.  And, as Chairman Nunes mentioned, this is one in a series of hearings that will be happening.  As I noted last week, there’s also a lot of interesting news coming out of that in terms of the activities that have gone on to reveal the information on American citizens that have been part of this, particularly General Flynn.  There’s a lot of things that aren’t being covered in this hearing that I think are interesting that -- since it’s ongoing, I’ll leave that for now.  But I think there’s a lot of areas that still need to be covered.  There’s a lot of information that still needs to be discussed.
Q    The director also said he’s investigating the links and the possibility of coordination between the Trump campaign and the Russians.  Given that the President just this morning said that the Democrats made up the Russia story, why would the FBI director be investigating a story if it’s simply --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t think that’s what he said.  But again, look at what --
Q    No, no, he did.  He said that he’s investigating the nature of any links between individuals associated with the Trump campaign and the Russian government, and whether or not there was any coordination.
MR. SPICER:  Correct.  But again, investigating it and having proof of it are two different things.  If you look at the acting Obama CIA director, he said that there’s smoke but there’s no fire.  Senator Tom Cotton -- "Not that I’ve seen and not that I’m aware of."  You look at Director Clapper -- “Not to my knowledge.”  Senator Chris Coons, Democrat from Delaware -- “I have no evidence of collusion.”
There’s a point at which you continue to search for something that everybody who’s been briefed hasn’t seen or found.  I think it’s fine to look into it, but at the end of the day, they’re going to come to the same conclusion that everybody else has had.  So you can continue to look for something, but continuing to look for something that doesn’t exist doesn’t matter.
There is a discussion -- I heard some names thrown around before -- that were hangers-on or on the campaign, and I think at some point people that got thrown around at the beginning of this hearing, some of those names, the greatest amount of interaction that they’ve had has had cease-and-desist letters sent to them.  
Q    You’re talking about the Roger Stones and the Carter Pages.
MR. SPICER:  Exactly, the Carter Pages, yes.  But those people, the greatest amount of interaction that they had with the campaign was the campaign apparently sending them a series of cease-and-desist letters.  So again, I think that when you read a lot of this activity about associates, there is a fine line between people who want to be part of something that they never had an official role in, and people who actually played a role in either the campaign or the transition.
Julie.
Q    Sean, I just had two quick questions on the hearing today.  Does the President -- now that we know there is an ongoing investigation by the FBI -- does the President stand by his comments that he is not aware of any contacts that his campaign associates had with Russia during the election?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    And then the second one is:  Has anyone from the White House --
MR. SPICER:  Well, can I just amend the first one?
Q    Sure.
MR. SPICER:  Obviously, just to be clear, I know that -- I’m trying to think through this for a second, because obviously General Flynn -- but again --
Q    Right, particularly during the campaign, before the election.  
MR. SPICER:  Right.  And I’m not aware of any at this time. But even General Flynn was a volunteer of the campaign, and then obviously there’s been discussion of Paul Manafort who played a very limited role for a very limited amount of time.  But beyond --
Q    He was the chairman of the campaign --
MR. SPICER:  Hey, Jonathan, hold on.  Can you stop interrupting other people’s questions?
Q    (Inaudible) played a limited role -- 
MR. SPICER:  Hey, Jonathan, somebody is asking a question.  It’s not your press briefing.  Julie is asking a question.  Please calm down.  Julie.
Q    Are you saying then that the President is aware of contacts that Manafort had during the campaign?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, nothing that hasn’t been previously discussed.  I just don’t want to make it look like we’re not aware of the stuff that’s --
Q    Understood.  And then the second thing is, anyone from the White House, up to the President, been interviewed by the FBI as part of this investigation?
MR. SPICER:  Not that I’m aware of.  
Mara.
Q    You said that -- you made a point of saying that Comey refused to say whether he had briefed Obama about the investigation.  And also, the President, on his official account, tweeted the same thing today.  Comey made a point today of saying, please do not draw any conclusions from my ability to confirm or deny anything, but you are drawing a conclusion from that.
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think we’re pointing it out.  I mean, we’re making a point that it is not known.  And I think there’s further -- I mean, to everyone who was looking for a conclusion today, I think there’s a lot more that needs to be discussed and looked at before we can jump to a conclusion about -- 
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  But I think the point is, is that, in the same token you’ve got individuals that want an answer, and at the same time, there’s clearly a lot of information that still hasn’t come out or been discussed.
Q    So you’re looking forward to this investigation --
MR. SPICER:  I think that we are -- there is a lot more to come is the answer that I --
Q    But the reason that I’m asking this question is you said that they are going to come to the same conclusion of everybody else.
MR. SPICER:  My point is, is that --
Q    So you already know what the conclusion is?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no.  What I’m getting at is that there is this continuous -- there is this media narrative that continues to talk about collusion that exists, and yet every person that's been briefed -- Nunes; Tom Cotton; Chris Coons, Democrat of Delaware; Clapper, the Obama appointee -- have all said that nothing that they've seen makes them believe that there was any collusion.  
And I think there’s a difference between talking about an investigation into the 2016 election, which we all know, and any evidence of collusion.  There is no evidence, according to the people that have been briefed, of any collusion or activity that leads them to believe that that exists.  I think that is an important point that gets overlooked over and over and over again.  
Q   Right, but you said it’s fine to look into it, but they are going to come to the same conclusion of everybody else -- that this collusion doesn’t exist.  So you already know --
MR. SPICER:  No, I don’t.  What I’m --
Q    -- investigation is finished -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, that’s not what I’m saying.  What I’m saying is, is that every single person -- because what the director said today is that there's an ongoing investigation.  My point is to say that everybody who's been briefed on that investigation -- it doesn’t -- there is an assumption that because there is an investigation, it must mean that it’s about something.  
My point to you is that there is an assumption on behalf of most people in the media about what that investigation must mean.  And my point to you is, is that, despite the narrative that gets played over and over again with respect to what the investigation might mean in terms of collusion, every person, Republican and Democrat, that has been briefed on it has come to the same conclusion that there is no collusion and that that’s over.  
So while we can talk about an investigation, big-picture holistically, the idea that so many people are trying to jump to a conclusion seems very, very misguided. 
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Two quick ones.  First -- briefing with the President, do you expect the invitation to President Xi to that summit that's being reported on for next month to be -- was that extended on that trip?  And do you expect that to be taking place early April, the 6th, 7th and 8th?
MR. SPICER:  I’ll try to have more of a readout afterwards.  I know that they’re going to talk extensively about what he accomplished in both Japan, South Korea, and obviously in Beijing.  But I’m going to let the Secretary of State debrief the President before I get ahead of deciding what was discussed in Beijing.
Q    And back to the previous topic.  I was hoping you could square the circle a little bit.  You said in the case of the President’s tweets, on this an ongoing investigation, that more things will come out that may justify that.  But in the case of the Clinton charges, you listed all the people who have said (inaudible) investigation there.  Why, in one case, is that sufficient to say that there is no -- you could rule out collusion now, versus in the other case you'd say, oh, there is going to be more information coming out that will prove these tweets?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I’m not -- because again, I think there’s a difference.  I’m not ruling anything out.  I’m merely explaining to you that every person -- Republican, Democrat, Obama, that served in the Obama administration across a broad section --
Q    You can say the same thing about tweets.  
MR. SPICER:  In terms of what?
Q    Wiretappings.   
MR. SPICER:  But I think that there is -- on the investigation itself, we know from the people who have been briefed.  On the other piece of it, we know that there is -- it’s an ongoing thing, and that even according to the Department of Justice in terms of the information that has been provided and Chairman Nunes, that they are still at the beginning of this process.  That is a very different thing than a group of people saying there is an ongoing investigation.  And from what we’ve been briefed, there is no evidence to suggest any type of collusion.  That’s the difference.
Hunter.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  On a slightly different topic:  In his first eight weeks in office, President Trump has made at least 10 trips to the golf course.  He regularly used to criticize President Obama for spending time on the course.  How is his golf game any different?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think two things.  One is, you saw him utilize this as an opportunity with Prime Minister Abe to help foster deeper relationships in Southeast Asia -- in Asia, rather -- and have a growing relationship that's going to help U.S. interests.  How you use the game of golf is something that he has talked about.
Secondly, we went down to -- he had a mini Cabinet meeting the other day down -- or two weekends ago, down at his club in Virginia.  And I remember so many people jumping to the conclusion that he’s going down and playing golf.  Just because you go somewhere doesn’t necessarily mean that you did that.  So on a couple of occasions, he’s actually conducted meetings there, he's actually had phone calls.  So just because he heads there doesn’t mean that that's what's happening.
Q    I know he did meet with Prime Minister Abe on the course, but we're not getting a lot of details on other high-level meetings that are taking place.  If he is having these productive meetings on the course, why isn’t the President and his aides being a little more forthcoming about what he's doing?
MR. SPICER:  It's the same reason that he can have dinner or lunch with somebody and not -- because I think the President is entitled to a bit of privacy at some point, which is what we've always agreed to.  We bring the protective pool to be there, but the President is also entitled to a bit of privacy as well.
Trey.
Q    Does the President believe the FBI will do a fair job of investigating any sort of links to Russia during the election?  And then I have one more for you.
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think there's a variety of institutions looking at it -- both the House and the Senate Intelligence Committee, the FBI.  But, yeah, I think that when you get to the bottom of it, we'll have a much better picture of what's happening, and I think it will continue to vindicate him on that.
Go ahead.
Q    In a follow-up, the President tweeted this morning a question about a potential DNC connection to Russia during the election.  Is he under the impression that the Clinton campaign had inappropriate contact with Russia during the election?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that -- and that's an interesting aspect of all of this that's not being covered.  Number one, from everything that's been publicly available, on several occasions the DNC was asked by the FBI to investigate -- or to allow their servers to be looked at, despite all of the claims of their concerns about leaking.  And yet, the question still doesn’t come out -- why wouldn’t the DNC, on multiple occasions, rebuff the FBI?  Why were they not wanting -- if they were so concerned about hacks and leaking, why did the DNC not ask the FBI to come look?  Not only did they not ask them; they rebuffed them on multiple occasions.  Why?  What are they hiding?  What were they concerned of?
But I think there is a serious question.  I mean, it's not -- they're very clear about the concerns they have, as well as all of the leadership in the Democratic Party.  And yet when it came to hacks and leaks out of the DNC -- and they're quick to jump to the conclusion about who did it, and yet they wouldn’t allow the FBI to investigate it -- there's a whole second set of concerns here in terms of what was Hillary Clinton's role.  I mean, if you look at the Obama administration and the Clintons' involvement with Russia in terms of donations the Clintons received from Russia and entities, the idea that they sold off a tremendous amount of the uranium to the Russian government, and yet where was the concern for that?  What are we doing to look into that?  It was the Obama administration in 2009 that talked about a reset with Russia and a desire to reset relationships.  It was Hillary Clinton who signed off on the deal that gave a Russian company one-fifth of the U.S. uranium supply.  Where is the questioning about that?  What did they get?
There was discussion the other day about a Russian official noting that both campaigns they sought to -- where is the concern about their efforts on the Hillary Clinton thing?  The Democrats and the Democratic Party, and a lot of those individuals are quick to point fingers, and yet when it comes to discussing their own collusion or questions involving their involvement with Russian officials or buy-offs to the Russians, there's no discussion there.  So you got to wonder, on both sides, where's the parity when it comes to these kinds of investigations?
Margaret.
Q    Sean, what constitutes conclusive evidence for the President on this front when you say there's more to come forward?  You've got the FBI director saying nothing to back up the President's tweets about wiretapping, the former head of the DNI, House Intelligence Committees.  I mean, you've had a series of officials.  So when does this end for the President?  Is it March 28th?
MR. SPICER:  It's not a question of a date, it's a question of where we get answers.  If you look at someone like Michael Flynn and you ask the question, how does an American citizen, who should be protected by law from having their identity unmasked, how does that happen?  Because you got to think about it just like this:  The FBI and all the relevant intelligence agencies have access to this document; they can figure out who it was.  Right?  So --
Q    I'm sorry -- who it was?
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  In other words, they --
Q    The wiretapping of the President, that's the claim.
MR. SPICER:  Listen.  I understand that.  What I'm getting at is that there's a lot of information that we have come to learn about what happened in terms of surveillance throughout the 2016 election and the transition.  And when you look at somebody like Michael Flynn and you realize that while they might have been looking at somebody else at that time, how does somebody's name that's protected by law from being disclosed get put out in the public?  Why was it put out in the public?  Because the people in the intelligence community would have had access to that information.  They could have found out who it was.  But yet you've got to question why was a name that should have been protected by law from being put out into the public domain put out there?  What were the motives behind that?  What else do we need to know?  Who was behind that kind of unmasking?
Q    So are you saying the President has evidence that we have yet to see in public? 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, I am saying that there's a lot more questions that need to get asked about what was being done in terms of surveillance, who was being surveilled, why were they being involved, what techniques -- why are certain people being sort of "unmasked" and having their identity known, what was going on.  But there's a lot more questions than answers that need to get asked.
Q    Who does the President trust to provide those answers if not the heads of all those agencies?
MR. SPICER:  And we've talked about this ad nauseam, that the House and the Senate Intelligence Committees are looking into this.  Today is the first of several hearings that Chairman Nunes intends to call.  Senator Burr has already talked about it.  There's a ways to go.  And I get that you guys want to know the end of the book right now, but we're on the first chapter of this process. 
Steve.
Q    So Burr and Nunes, he does trust them to provide --
MR. SPICER:  Of course.  We've put out a statement saying so much that we asked them to look into it.  So I don’t think it should come to any surprise that that's where we have noted multiple times that that's where the President believe the appropriate place and the process for all of these documents to go through.
Steve.
Q    The President said he had a lot of meetings over the weekend on North Korea.  Who were those meetings with?  And what was his reaction to North Korea's test of this new rocket engine?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think we continue to be concerned with North Korea's activity.  That's why not only have we continued to have conversations with officials in Japan and South Korea, but we continue to urge China to step in and play a larger role in deterring both the ballistic and other missile threats that North Korea plays.  I will try to have a further readout on some of those conversations, but I think there is growing concern about North Korea.  I think that is part of what Secretary Tillerson is going to be discussing to him during their meeting.
Q    And did Tillerson get a promise from China to weigh in more on North Korea?
MR. SPICER:  I think he sent a very clear signal that our policy of strategic patience is over.  The President and the Secretary of State have an expectation that China employed multiple points of pressure on North Korea.  We know that we don’t agree 100 percent of the time with China, but as the State Department noted yesterday, both President Xi and Secretary Tillerson agreed that there are opportunities for greater cooperation between China and the United States, and acknowledged that there are and will be in the future differences between the two countries.  But I think that Secretary Tillerson's trip continued to -- or helped set us down that path.  And I think that the follow-on meetings that the leaders intend to have will be helpful in that vein.
Q    Given the talk last week about the budget, the priorities for the American tax dollars, the need to cut programs like -- or make cuts to programs like Meals on Wheels, is the President going to consider curbing some of his trips to Mar-a-Lago that the GAO estimates could cost $3 million for the President to Palm Beach?  Is he planning to cut those back at all given his feelings about the priorities for the Americans' tax dollars?
MR. SPICER:  I think that is a vast reach to suggest -- I mean, Presidents always travel.  And I think the President, wherever he goes, he carries the apparatus of the White House with us.  That is just something that happens.  The President will continue to go and travel around the country and have meetings to solve the nation's problems.
And again, I think just -- because I know you took a little bit of a shot there, I think even The Washington Post, which is no friend to conservatives, even they sided with us that these false sort of narratives on Meals on Wheels -- it’s not a federal program.  Three percent of their total budget comes from a block grant that’s passed through there.  It’s a state-run program.  They had apparently a phenomenal weekend this week.
I get that that’s a cute program to point at, but it's false and misleading to try to make that narrative stick.
Q    So to your point that all Presidents travel, no President has traveled so often and so early to their own private residence.  
MR. SPICER:  President Bush went to Crawford.
Q    Not this often and --
MR. SPICER:  I get it, I get it.  But at the same time, the President is -- very clearly that he’s worked seven days a week.  This is where he goes to see his family.  He brings people down there.  This is part of being President.
John.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Turning back to the meeting with Chancellor Merkel on Friday, did the President and the Chancellor discuss the economic crisis in Greece at all?  And given the appointment of two officials to the Treasury Department who have been critical of the International Monetary Fund, does the administration see a new or different role for the IMF in resolving the Greek economic crisis?
MR. SPICER:  Let me refer you to the Treasury Department on IMF.  I think the readout that we provided on the Secretary’s -- on the Chancellor’s visit, rather -- excuse me -- speaks for itself.  They spoke at length as far as what they discussed and what they meant.  So I’m not going to step on that.
Francesca.
Q    Thank you.  Are you aware of any White House officials that are under investigation by the FBI?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    Okay.  And you mentioned the “hangers-on” in the campaign earlier and Carter Page, but there was also a question about Roger Stone.  Was he also in that category?  Is he someone that the President is still in frequent contact with?  Because he’s often called an informal advisor to the President and a confidante of his.  
MR. SPICER:  Mr. Stone is somebody the President has known for a long time.  He worked briefly on the campaign I think until about August of 2015, from recollection.  They have talked from time to time but I don’t think any time recently.  But they had a long relationship going back years where he would provide counsel.  And again, he played a role early on in his campaign but ended that role in August of 2015.  And I don’t know at all when the last time they even spoke was.
Q    Sean, in the meeting this morning with Gates, did the President’s cut in NIH funding come up?  And how does he square meeting with Gates and sort of focusing on this whole need to continue medical research and then at the same time want to cut medical research funding by such a large amount?
MR. SPICER:  I know they talked about cures and health, and I think he applauds a lot of the work that they’ve done overseas in particular.  I don’t have a full readout on it yet, but I’ll try to get you more on it.
Look, we’ve discussed the NIH in particular.  I think that there’s this assumption in Washington that if you don’t spend more on a subject that you’re not caring as much.  When you look at some of the agencies and departments and programs that we’ve seen, in many cases they’re not meeting their mission.  And I think there are cost-savings that can be achieved so that you can focus the dollars that are being allocated towards a more effective use of the mission at hand.
But it’s interesting, only in Washington do you literally judge the success of something by how much money you throw at the problem, not actually whether it’s solving the problem or coming up with anything.  
April.
Q    Sean, I want to go to a couple of topics.  One, back on wiretapping, Comey said he had no information supporting that President Obama wiretapped President Trump.  So with that, you have Schiff saying things like there are half-truths coming from this President; no truth, it’s dangerous; we’re alienating our allies; we need to be able to trust our President.  And with that, I’m going to ask you -- and I need an answer for this -- how do you regain trust, as some view him as the boy who cried wolf?
MR. SPICER:  I think if you’re citing Adam Schiff’s political diatribe at the beginning as some sort of sense of -- he literally went off -- 
Q    But you have Comey saying -- 
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  If you want to talk about a series of mistruths and misdirection, I think if you look at that opening statement it was filled with those.  So I don’t need to use that as some basis for having to respond to you.  I was watching a lot of the reporter response on Twitter initially to his sort of diatribe, and I think there were several folks that talked about how he’s mischaracterizing and taking things way out of context.  So to use that as the basis of some kind of authoritative --
Q    What about Comey saying there is no information?  How do you regain the trust at that --
MR. SPICER:  April, I’ve addressed this multiple times.  At this point, we are at the beginning phases of this and we have a ways to go.
John.
Q    Wait, I’m not finished.  I asked on the budget.  On the budget.  How -- and this is kind of going back to --
MR. SPICER:  This is number three now.
Q    Not really; it’s number two.  Thank you.  How is the President contributing to his own role of reducing spending, the deficit and the debt, and his management of spending here at the White House?
MR. SPICER:  There’s a lot -- we’ve used -- the White House, when it looks at a total percentage of the budget, is miniscule.  I think that to ask that question is somewhat ironic after seeing Director Mulvaney sit up here the other day and talk about the savings and the cost-cutting measures that we’ve seen across the entire budget.  He sat up here and got grilled on that and answered effectively how the President is looking at efficiencies and duplicity in all programs throughout government.  
So it’s not just a question of here at the White House, but he’s looking at it holistically throughout all of government.  But then you look at some of the activities the President is personally engaged in terms of the F-35, the next generation of Air Force One, personally getting -- and looking at ways in which we can create a more effective and efficient procurement process.  That’s one area where I think you’re going to see the President personally engage on more and more, is looking at all the stuff that the government buys and how we’re doing it, our bidding process in so many ways, especially in the Department of Defense.
Q    What about salaries?  We know three people here are not taking salaries.  But what about salaries?  I’m talking about since he’s making these massive cuts, is the hurt going to come here as well?
MR. SPICER:  Sure.  It’s not just a hurt, but you bring it up -- there are multiple people here who are not taking salaries.  I mean, that is -- 
Q    Three,
MR. SPICER:  Huh?
Q    Three.  
MR. SPICER:  No, way more than three, April.
Q    How many?
MR. SPICER:  I’ll get back to you, but there are several individuals that are not taking a salary here.  So when you talk about commitment to helping to come serve this government, serve the President and actually help institute a vision, there’s a lot of people who have sacrificed tremendously in terms of saying, I’ll give up -- I’ve done very well for myself, this country has benefitted me, this is an opportunity for me to give back -- that there are people well through this organization who have done that.
John.
Q    The President met with Dr. Emanuel, as you pointed out, a short time ago.  He’s probably one of the fiercest critics of what the President is trying to do of anybody out there.  He’s made it quite clear that he believes that this will take us back to worse than we were before the Affordable Care Act came in.  What did the President hope to gain by meeting with Dr. Emanuel today?
MR. SPICER:  Well, he’s an architect of Obamacare.  I think that despite our political and policy differences, he wants to hear ideas not just of him but a lot of people.  We’ve brought in people on both sides of the aisle from both houses, from industry.  The idea is to try to make this the best possible -- he talked to Elijah Cummings a couple weeks ago about drug prices.  It’s not about ideology or party, it’s about instituting a patient-centric drug and healthcare system that benefits the American people and gives them the access and the price point that they can get healthcare and actually get coverage.  
So it is hearing his ideas.  It’s listening to his suggestions and figuring out if we can make it better.  Part of the manager's amendment that Speaker Ryan talked about is in large part because we’ve been listening and making it better and making it better.  And as it continues to work its will through the process, it’s not just the current bill but it’s also the additional legislation that’s part of this overall three-pronged process that we’ve talked about.  So making sure that we do this right and we give the American people the best possible outcome is what this has always been about.
Q    The Speaker wants to get this in front of the House maybe by Thursday.  How much will the plan change between now and then compared to what we saw voted on in the first two committees?
MR. SPICER:  Three.  The House Ways and Means Committee -- 
Q    And is the President going up to the Hill tomorrow morning?
MR. SPICER:  We don’t have any announcements on the schedule at this time.  He’s going to continue to make sure that we do everything we can, and I’ll leave the legislative piece up to Speaker Ryan.
Q    How much does he think is going to change between what we saw voted on by Ways and Means --
MR. SPICER:  It depends on how much -- look, I think Speaker Ryan detailed some additions and ideas and suggestions on your network yesterday with Chris Wallace that he is considering, and I think as we continue to meet with folks -- there are some staff-level discussions that occurred over the weekend.  There will be more later this afternoon.  And to the extent that we can make changes that I think enable us to maintain 218 votes, we will do it.
Sara.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  There are a number of the President’s supporters on the Hill and elsewhere who worry that the President’s refusal to drop the whole wiretapping issue will eclipse some of his other accomplishments.  What message does the President have for his supporters who worry that this could be a rabbit hole that might diminish the other things he’s trying to, like healthcare?
MR. SPICER:  I think there will be a lot of accomplishments, so they don’t need to worry.  We’ve got a lot of things coming down the pike, and I think whether it’s healthcare, tax reform, his infrastructure plan, reforming government, immigration -- I think we’re going to have a lot of things to be very proud of that people on both sides of the aisle are going to be excited to see enacted.  And so in due time there will be plenty to be proud of.  
Sara.
Q    You dismiss Paul Manafort as sort of an incidental figure in this campaign.  But he worked for the campaign for five months, he was the campaign chairman, he was there for a number of pivotal decisions.  So I’m wondering how is that insignificant, and is the White House aware of any contacts between Paul Manafort and Russian operatives or suspected Russian operatives?  And is that cause for concern?
MR. SPICER:  Well, just so we’re clear:  I’m not dismissing Paul Manafort as a hanger-on, I was noting to some other folks, as Jonathan pointed out.  With respect to Paul, though, I believe -- and again, I’m not looking to re-litigate the election or -- but I believe Paul was brought on sometime in June, and by the middle of August he was no longer with the campaign, meaning that for the entire final stretch of the general election, he was not involved.  And so to start to look at some individual that was there for a short period of time, or, separately, individuals who really didn’t play any role in the campaign, and to suggest that those are the basis for anything is a bit ridiculous.
Q    So are you saying it wouldn’t be cause for concern if we found out that Paul Manafort was in contact with Russian operatives or suspected operatives when he was the campaign chairman?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, I think that -- but to intimate that somebody who was there for eight weeks, and definitely not there in the final three months of the campaign played some kind of lasting role that influenced -- you know, again, you realize, I think somewhere between March -- I mean, August 12th or the 15th was when he ended his affiliation with the campaign.
So my point is, to suggest now that if you look at the final three months of the campaign where none of the individuals in question that Democrats brought up over and over again today were affiliated with the campaign -- to suggest that that somehow shows some high-level collusion is a bit of a stretch to say the least.
Q    And is the White House aware of any contacts between Paul Manafort and Russian operatives or suspected Russian operatives?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    He joined in March.  Sean, you’ve been really critical of reports that are based on sources in the past.  Today it seems like the two headlines that we got out of the committee were, one, an official confirmation directly from the FBI and the Justice Department that there is an ongoing criminal investigation into whether associates of the sitting President had contacts with Russia and Russian operatives, and whether there was any coordination between those.  
And the second headline being that there is an official -- you had questioned in the past, Priebus a couple weeks ago, when there were reports in our paper and others that the FBI director was indicating that there was no support for President’s tweets, you said, well, those are just reports; those are not coming from his mouth -- he hasn’t said it.  Okay, we’ve now got it from his mouth directly, in open testimony, that there is no evidence that he has to support the President’s tweets.  
I guess the question is, do those two facts, which are now on the record and not attributed to anonymous sourcing -- does that cause this White House any concern?  And how come you treat the one -- the latter, the one about wiretapping -- you want to say that’s just in the early stages, but on the former one, you want to sort of come to the conclusion that the investigation has sort of gotten to the point where you don’t have to worry about that because that’s all said and done and everybody has come to the conclusion on that?  So that seems like you’re treating both of those pieces of news very differently. 
MR. SPICER:  Well, first, I think your headlines are bad.  I’m glad to rewrite --
Q    I don’t think that.  
MR. SPICER:  I’d be glad to if you guys are looking for some help.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Are you looking for a job?
MR. SPICER:  Our services are at the New York Times’ disposal if it comes to writing headlines, and we could probably do a couple things on stories too, if you’re willing to go there.
I think because there’s a big difference.  One is, literally talking -- there’s a big difference.  Everyone keeps conflating that there is an investigation into the 2016 election.  Got it -- no disagreement there.  Right?  But I think that there’s a question about collusion between anybody.  And my point has been to say over and over again, to the dismay of every one of you guys, is that when the people who have been briefed by the FBI about collusion between individuals, the answer continues to be “no.”  And at some point, take no for an answer.  
When these people, both sides of the aisle -- Obama appointees, elected Democrats, elected Republicans -- say "no evidence suggested," at some point it's not just about me, it's about you:  Take no for an answer.  And realize that the people -- while you can have an investigation, it doesn’t necessarily mean that you have to jump to the conclusion that, ah ha, it must be about the collusion between those two things.
They've talked about this for a long time.  The 17 intelligence agencies have talked about an ongoing investigation into Russia's involvement in the election.  That's vastly different than jumping to the conclusion and saying that there must be somehow, therefore, a collusion between individuals on one side.  They don’t talk about all of the Hillary Clinton collusion that may or may not have occurred, and that was a subject that came up with a Russian official, and yet that has not gotten pursued once. 
There were zero minutes paid on the evening news the other night, when that Russian official said that they had attempted to reach out to both campaigns.  Zero minutes.  I know, I know -- see, I'm an equal opportunity --
Q    But can I just ask, does the President need to take no for an answer in the same way that you're urging the news media to on this?
MR. SPICER:  No, because one is a bunch of people who have been briefed who are saying, we haven’t seen anything.  And one is an ongoing -- because, again, when you ask them, they are getting at -- the President was very clear, and I think there is continuing to be a very, very literal interpretation of his tweet, which is whether or not there was wiretapping.  The President understands that you don’t literally wiretap people the same way that you did in the '70s and '80s with wires and things in the phone.  
Q    Director Comey didn’t focus on wiretapping.  He focused on the question of surveillance.  
MR. SPICER:  No, but again, I think that we are still at the beginning phase of a look as to what kind of surveillance occurred and why, and that there's a question about what leaks occurred, why they're happening.  And again, just Director Comey -- because I believe one of the big headlines that should come out of today is that when he talks about the unusually high amount of leaks that are coming out of this, and classified information leaks, that in itself should be a question:  Why is so much information being leaked out now?  What are the motives behind it?  Who is doing it?  And is it threatening our national security?  Which I do believe the answer is yes.  But there's a lot of other stories.
And that's why I think, with all due respect to your two headlines coming out, I do believe there's a lot of headlines coming out.  It's just that the only headlines that people want to write are the ones that support a narrative against this administration, and not one that actually looks into how many times do people say that there was no evidence of something happening; how many times -- or how much classified information is being leaked.  There's a lot of headlines that should be written today about a lot of stuff that's ongoing.  And I know that we have an ongoing hearing, but there's a lot of other things that need to get discussed and aren’t being happening.  
Why did the DNC not let the FBI look at their servers?  Why is that story not -- because I would assume that if somebody was a victim of something, which they have yelled from the rooftops --
Q    And you -- 
Q    The President made the allegation.  
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, hold on --
Q    I'm sorry, I'm curious -- the implication of that is what?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, the question is, why is none of that being looked at?
Q    I understand the question.  But --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know what the -- but my point is, is that, not to draw an implication, but to merely ask a question, which all I'm getting at is that suddenly none of the questions regarding any of this seemed to get asked or answered or explored.  And yet --
Q    But you won.  You're here.  
MR. SPICER:  Brian, you get the same treatment that Jonathan does.  That doesn’t mean you get to jump in.  So the answer that I'm getting at is, why are none of those questions being asked?  Why is no one taking no for an answer when it comes to all of these individuals saying that they've seen nothing?  But there are a series of headlines that I would suggest need to get written and, frankly, stories.  I'm glad to do that, as I offered.
George.
Q    I'd like to try to clarify two things.  In the future, when you, from that podium, read from news articles or cite news articles, can we assume that you're vouching for the accuracy of those articles?
MR. SPICER:  I think merely reading a story that's in a paper is not vouching for it, it's reading the story.
Q    It doesn’t put a White House --
MR. SPICER:  No.  I think reading a series of things when asked a question, "where is this narrative coming from," and citing a multitude of stories that are in the public domain is not necessarily endorsing everything I read.  That's a silly assertion.  We're reading stories that you and your colleagues -- and not necessarily you at National Journal -- have put out, but several people in here whose publication have put something out.  Simply reciting those things is not an endorsement.
Q    The second thing is, when you talked to the British about the GCHQ thing, did you tell them that the White House would not raise that again?  Or can you talk about that conversation?
MR. SPICER:  There was merely an explanation of what we did and why we did it, which is what I just said to you.  And that was it -- simply that.  
Thank you, guys, for that.  We'll see you tomorrow.  Hopefully some of you get a chance to go down today.  If you don't, we'll have a readout.  Thank you.
 END
Daily Press Briefing by the Press Secretary - #25
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 

1:56 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  Hi, guys.  The hearing is still -- Judge Gorsuch’s hearing is ongoing, and considering the significant attention, I'm going to try to keep this a little on the shorter side today.
The President is making a full day of progress towards some of his biggest promises that he’s made to the American people.  This morning he met with the House Republican Conference members on Capitol Hill, ahead of the House’s scheduled vote on the American Health Care Act, which is currently scheduled for Thursday.
During the meeting, the President reminded members of the House Conference that repealing and replacing Obamacare has been a promise that Republicans have been making to voters for years.
Members have made it clear that if voters put a Republican in the White House and continue Republican majorities in the House and the Senate that we would repeal and replace this ill-advised legislation.
And for every member who pledged to the American people that they would deliver on this promise, this is really their chance. This is the repeal of Obamacare that Republicans have been working on for years, and voters have been waiting for this for some time.
On Thursday, as the House gathers on the floor and casts their votes for the ACH, it will be exactly seven years after President Obama had signed Obamacare into law.  We’re hoping to make this the last anniversary Americans will have to endure Obamacare.  Republicans have been working to repeal and replace this misguided law ever since.  And now, under President Trump, we will finally be able to take this step towards fundamental reform of our healthcare system. 
I think most Americans remember the lines that were used to sell Obamacare seven years ago:  “If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor.”  “If you like your healthcare plan, you’ll be able to keep your healthcare plan.”  But for millions of Americans, those lines proved to be nothing more than empty promises.  Plans that their families had relied on for years were suddenly cancelled.  Premiums and deductibles skyrocketed, leaving many who had plans unable to actually use them.  And insurers fled the marketplace.  Nearly one in five Americans only have one insurer offering plans on their Obamacare exchange.
President Trump and Republicans in Congress will keep their promise by reforming the system once and for all.  And that’s exactly what we’re doing with the American Health Care Act, which, along with the additional legislative and administrative action that is part of the three-prong approach that we continue to outline, will finally give all Americans the healthcare system they deserve, where market-based competition leads to more affordable, higher-quality care opportunities.
This is an ongoing process, and the President has made it clear to Congress that they should be open to incorporating some of the common-sense policy proposals that have been suggested by members in both chambers who share their commitment to improving the healthcare system.  To that end, the House introduced several technical and policy amendments to the legislation last night, which the President acknowledged on Capitol Hill this morning. 
They include:  Delivering more immediate relief from Obamacare’s taxes, accelerating the repeal of these taxes from 2017 rather than from 2018, and ensuring that millions of Americans who paid Obamacare’s penalties or taxes can reclaim their hard-earned dollars from the IRS.
It's making it easier for Americans to deduct more of the costs of their medical expenses.  
Protecting life by prohibiting taxpayer dollars from being used to help purchase insurance plans that currently cover abortion.
Giving states additional flexibility for their Medicaid program covering traditional adult and children populations, while maintaining baseline funding for elderly and disabled populations.
Giving states the ability to implement optional, reasonable work requirements for able-bodied adults without dependents as part of their Medicaid programs.
Freezing Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion while allowing for a responsible unwinding, so that people who enroll before 2020 will continue to be supported by the program.
And providing a more generous reimbursement for elderly and disabled Medicaid enrollees, recognizing that those populations have unique needs that must be taken care of.
After a return to the White House from the House -- speaking to the House Republican Conference, the President received his Daily Intelligence Briefing.  Then the President signed S.442, the NASA Administration Transition Authorization Act for 2017, acting on another of the President’s most ambitious promise to the American people.  Many may recall in his joint address, the President said of a dream.”
And with this bill, he is taking the latest step towards making that dream a reality by reiterating NASA’s mission to ensure America remains a leader in space exploration. 
This bipartisan, bicameral legislation provides NASA with the full support it needs to fulfill this and many other important missions, including:  supporting NASA’s plan to explore deep space and sending astronauts to Mars, including an endorsement of launching the Mars 2020 Rover.  The rover will explore a site that is likely to have been habitable, seeking signs of past life and testing compelling samples and techniques for future robotic and eventual human exploration of Mars.
Reaffirming that NASA remains a fully multi-mission agency with a balanced set of core missions in space science, space technology, aeronautics, human space flight, exploration, and education.  
Endorsing NASA’s continued progress towards launching the James Webb Telescope, which will be a giant leap forward in our ever-evolving quest to understand the universe, and establishing an astronaut occupational healthcare program, something that NASA has considered a priority for years.
After the bill signing, the Vice President also announced that the President will be taking action shortly to relaunch the National Space Council, which the Vice President will chair.  The President was honored to sign this new bill into law so that NASA can continue its work towards making America the world leader in space exploration once again.
Also this morning, the President -- the Vice President, rather, hosted a breakfast meeting with Prime Minister al-Abadi of Iraq.  We provided a readout on the President’s meeting with the Prime Minister yesterday as well, and I believe there has been a readout of the Vice President’s as well.
At 3:00 p.m. this afternoon, the President will meet with members of Congress who are part of the House Tuesday Group to discuss the American Health Care Act.  And this evening, the President will speak at the National Republican Congressional Committee March Dinner.
Over on the Senate side of the Hill, the President’s pick for the Supreme Court, Judge Neil Gorsuch has been doing a phenomenal job in the Senate today during his first day of questioning.  The judge’s eloquent testimony yesterday was widely praised from both sides of the aisle, and it’s clear that everyone agrees, from a broad spectrum, that Judge Gorsuch is a very qualified person to serve on the Supreme Court.
As the Judge noted today, “a judge is there to make sure that every person, poor or rich, mighty or meek, gets equal protection of [under] the law.”  His records show that he has lived up to this commitment throughout his entire career, and he’s continuing to prove that he is exactly the type of jurist we need on the Supreme Court throughout the questioning that’s started today.
Today is also National Agriculture Day, for those who are keeping note.  The world needs America’s farmers and ranchers to lead, just as the world needs America to lead.  Global food demand is expected to increase by 50 to 97 percent by 2050.  The world can’t afford for America’s farmers and ranchers to retreat, but the agriculture industry has met its share of challenges in recent years.  While our farmers are the most efficient in the world, margins have been tightening, regulations have been multiplying, and exports, which have historically counted for over one-fifth of U.S. farm production, have been declining due to unwise trade policies.
The President promised the many people in the agriculture industry and throughout rural America that he would not allow this to continue, and he will continue to pursue policy changes that will reverse this disturbing trend.
Quickly, in terms of follow-up from yesterday, I was asked about North Korea, and I wanted to provide an update from the NSC: “The United States, in coordination with our allies, is exploring a new range of diplomatic, security, and economic measures in response to the grave and escalating threat posed by North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile programs.”
And before I open it up for questions, let me run through a few scheduling updates.  Tomorrow, the President will stop by the Women in Healthcare panel hosted by CMS Administrator Seema Verma.  There will also be a series of meetings with members of Congress tomorrow.  In the morning, the President will meet with members to discuss the American Health Care Act.  And in the afternoon he will meet with congressional -- members of the Congressional Black Caucus.
On Thursday, the President will have lunch with Secretary of the Treasury Mnuchin before hosting a meeting with truckers and representatives from trucking companies on healthcare that we discussed yesterday.  In many states throughout the country, trucking happens to be one of the largest employers, and it’s important to understand the impact of healthcare legislation on this important industry.
I’ll have updates on the weekend schedule for you hopefully tomorrow.  And finally, yesterday, pursuant to the President’s executive order on interior enforcement that he signed on January 25th, the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency, ICE, released its first weekly list of detainee requests, which local law enforcement agencies have failed to comply with.  These examples where criminal illegals who have been arrested or convicted, in many cases, of serious and violent crimes threaten public safety.  In each instance, local law enforcement is refusing to cooperate with ICE in its efforts to remove illegal immigrants who have committed a crime.  It is part of the President’s continued efforts to keep our communities safe.
A copy of this report is available on the ICE website that details all of the municipalities where there has been an issue and the crime that has been committed, and the person -- not necessarily the person’s name, but the offense in which they were convicted for.
And with that, I’d be glad to take a few questions.  Since we’re talking Supreme Court -- John Roberts.  (Laughter.)  Come on.  That was good.
Q    Unless there’s an Alito in the audience.  On healthcare, the President came away from Capitol Hill sounding pretty positive about where he was going to go on Thursday, but then at the same time, Heritage Action came out and said it was going to encourage members to vote “no.”  Club for Growth is taking out ads attacking this bill.  Jim Jordan said the President’s great, but it’s still a bad bill.  This is going to go to a vote day after tomorrow.  What gives the President the sense of optimism that he can get this through, and might he request more changes from Speaker Ryan before it goes to a vote?
MR. SPICER:  Well, we’ve talked about this for days.  There’s been a lot of input from members of Congress, and I think that the meeting this morning really was a huge sign of support. There was a lot of enthusiasm and optimism, not just for the bill itself but for something that, as I noted, conservatives and Republicans and a lot of Democrats, frankly, have been fighting for for a while, which is a more patient-centric healthcare system.
I think the President is continuing to engage with members. He will continue to do that all the way through Thursday.  But as I also noted, there were a lot of changes that were made by the Speaker last night, additional legislation -- the three-pronged approach that we’ve talked about in the past has been put forward to actually make sure that members understood the comprehensive nature of this.
This is one vehicle. There’s a huge administrative piece that Secretary Price will administer through administrative action that was given to them when they passed this bill and gave that authority to Kathleen Sebelius, then the Secretary of Health and Human Services, to implement pieces that they couldn’t get done legislatively.
We can now unwind a lot of that and add a lot of consumer-based and competition measures through the administrative thing. But then the third prong, all the other stuff that we've talked about for years as Republicans -- buying across state lines, expanding health savings accounts, et cetera, et cetera -- all of that has now been introduced as well.  And I think that he continues to meet with members and walk away with a very, very optimistic view of where the bill is headed.  I think a lot of the measures that have been changed and tweaked and updated have assuaged members who had concerns or wanted to see some additional tightening.  
But keep in mind, if you are a conservative who has been fighting for repeal and replace, this is your chance.  If you are a conservative who has been looking to address out-of-control entitlement spending, this is the first attempt -- this is the first reform of an entitlement program in terms of Medicaid in 30 years.  These are a truly conservative set of principles that we are fighting for.  The competition that's in the bill, the ability to allow prices to come down and choice to go up, there is nothing more conservative than there is in this bill.  And I think as members continue to talk about ideas that have been included in this bill, and the principles of it, we feel very good going into the final stretch.
Q    But may he seek more changes in order to further assuage some --
MR. SPICER:  It's possible.  But I think that we've made some very positive steps forward.  So I don’t want to rule anything out, but I will say that I feel very good about this where it stands now.  And I think the more and more that members meet with the President, the more they understand how important this is to the overall agenda that we're seeking to pass.  And I think if we can -- as the President noted this morning to members, if you can repeal Obamacare, replace it with a healthcare system that does what conservatives and independents, and, frankly, some Democrats have talked about it for years, that does exactly that kind of thing -- instill choice, drive down costs, allows people to actually get care that they've been promised, and then get on to things like tax reform -- we will have an amazing first year in office.
And I think the President reminded them this is the first step in an amazing agenda that he set forth and that we can work together on.
Eamon.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Members of this administration have talked about the stock market as a real-time barometer for how the administration is performing.  But this afternoon, though, the stock market has been off as much as 200 points on the Dow.  Some commentators on Wall Street are suggesting that's because traders are starting to sense a lack of progress in the Trump legislative agenda, worried that he might not be able to accomplish everything he set out to do.  Does the President believe that today's dip in the Dow is the result of his performance as President of the United States?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think to look at any one day is nothing that we've ever -- we've always cautioned.  I think overall it still continues to be up tremendously.  And I think when you look at not just that one indicator -- I think if you want to get a -- I mean, you probably know better than anybody in terms of what you guys cover -- that you can't look at one indices and say that that is the benchmark of an entire economy.  But you see confidence levels, both in small business and in other surveys, that show that there is continued confidence in the market and optimism in the market.  You see manufacturers coming back to America, talking about investment; major CEOs and small businesses trying to grow the economy and talking about job creation.  Those are the real indicators.  
And again, I think the numbers that we saw last month -- again, one month doesn’t make a record.  But I think that it was very promising, not just because of what the number was, but what it had been forecast to be -- right?  So it was expected to be 200,000; it came in at 235,000.  So, again, when you're over-performing, I think that shows a sign of optimism and confidence in the market.
I think -- again, I just want to make sure that we're clear before we go into -- as we continue through the months.  One report does not make something to base an entire record off of.  But I think that we feel very good about where things are headed and the direction things are going, not just in terms of the indices and the ups and downs in the market, but also in terms of the number of manufacturers that are walking in and restating their commitment to grow jobs, expand, et cetera, in the market.  
Q    -- feel confidence that President Trump will be able to get a tax cut done this year that would be in place for next year, is that something we should worry about at all?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I think we're well on our way to seeing this agenda done.  The President has rolled out the budget, which I think reaffirmed his commitment to fiscal austerity and to the priorities he set out of defending this country, making the increases in national defense and homeland security that he promised, prioritizing other things in the budget.  We've got Obamacare done, on immigration, executive order-wise.  
And I think that when you're doing big things -- Obamacare, tax reform -- I mean, the healthcare system is a fifth of the economy; that's not small fee.  And I think in terms of what you've seen so far -- going through three committees, moving along -- the Senate ready to take it up, his pick of Neil Gorsuch -- the agenda is moving along at a very brisk pace in terms of what his priorities were and where I think we're headed.
Q    Sean, last month, I guess, you talked to us about the consideration, potentially, of the carbon tax, which I guess was discussed in a meeting at the White House.  We're hearing some reports that there's a pretty lively internal debate.  Gary Cohn might be someone who's more prone to that.  Can you just discuss, is the President considering a carbon tax?  And what are sort of the various things that are going on in the White House with that?
MR. SPICER:  I think there's a robust debate going on with respect to comprehensive tax reform.  And as we've mentioned, I mean, our goal right now is to get through Thursday, and that's what the President has talked about very publicly.  We need to get Obamacare repealed and replaced, and move on to tax reform and some of the other trade reviews that we've talked about -- immigration.  There's a lot of things on the agenda.  But I'm not going to comment on specific prongs of that.  I will just tell you that obviously there's a lot of people who recognize that we haven’t have comprehensive tax reform since 1986, and that there’s a lot of pieces in this that we need to examine and get to and there’s a lot of voices and opinions that get shared with him.
So I’m not in a position where I’m going to get into commenting piecemeal on where it is, but I will say that’s even more reason that we -- let’s get past Thursday.  When you look at the week ahead real quick, Glenn, in terms of this, the repeal-and-replace aspect and Gorsuch, I think, from a legislative standpoint -- going back to Eamon’s question -- I think it’s a pretty big week for the White House to seeing all this done.
Hunter.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  President Trump has previously indicated that he wanted to appoint pro-life judges who would be willing to overturn Roe vs. Wade, yet in his testimony today Judge Gorsuch said he would have walked out the door if President Trump asked if he had this position.  Is President Trump still confident that Judge Gorsuch would be willing to overturn Roe vs. Wade?  And is this position still important to him?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President’s comments speak for themselves.  I think the President’s list that he’s put out on 20 are jurists that both the Federalist Society and Heritage have deemed to be people who interpret the Constitution as originalists, as people who aren’t looking to legislate from the bench.  And I’m not going to take the bait during a live hearing to comment on that but I appreciate the effort.
Ronika.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  I have two questions on the same story.  Recently a 14-year-old girl, she was raped in the boy’s bathroom of her high school.  A 17- and 18-year-old boy have been charged.  One of the boys we know unlawfully entered the country; both of them have outstanding orders with ICE.  So here’s my first question about it:  Currently, schools are prohibited from denying access to public education based on immigration status.  Does the President hear a story like that and think that it should change or be addressed in a future executive order?
MR. SPICER:  I think first, let me just say that this is a tragic event, and it’s horrendous and horrible and disgusting what this young woman in Rockville went through.  I can’t possibly imagine.  So first of all, let’s remember the human side of this, that this is a tragic event that no child, no person, no parent should ever have to deal with.  Schools should be a place where a parent puts their child on a bus or drops them off or sees them off and knows that they’re safe.  And the idea that this occurred is shocking, disturbing, horrific, and whatever other words that come to mind that someone can think of.
Because this is not -- schools should be a safe place where children are there to learn and to feel safe.  In that kind of environment -- to know that this happened and the circumstances 
-- this young women in particular fought to come to this country legally because of the freedoms and the treasures of this nation. And to think that this kind of tragedy would occur to someone who’s personally endured that kind of struggle to come to this nation and then face this is reprehensible.  And it is not who we are as a country.  
I think it is troubling, and I think further, to your question, the President recognizes that education is a state-run and a local-run issue.  But I think it is pause for concern what happened there, and I think the city should look at its policies. And I think that this is something that authorities are going to have to look at.
I think from an immigration standpoint, clearly to see somebody -- there are so many facets of this case that deserve question -- why was there a -- I think he was 17 or 18 years old -- 18, thank you -- and how does that person get put into the ninth grade?  Why was -- there are so many issues that come up in this case.
I will leave it to authorities to get to, but I think that we are in the early stages of this and there’s a lot that needs to get addressed with respect to this case in particular.  
Q    So I hear you about it being a state issue.  Let’s talk about something, though, that the President has implemented and introduced VOICE -- VOICE, Victims of Immigration Crime Enforcement -- is that enough to support a --
MR. SPICER:  No, it’s one piece.  The President understands that victims need a voice, which is why he brought it in there, to help them when they’re specifically targeted or victims of a crime by people who are here illegally.  But I think part of the reason that the President has made illegal immigration and crackdown such a big deal is because of tragedies like this.
We act so many times when we talk about this and say -- how is the President going to -- why is the President dealing with this -- because of this priority.  Well, part of the reason is because of the tragedy that this young girl dealt with, had inflicted upon her, whatever the word is -- this is why he’s passionate about this, because people are victims of these crimes in terms of them -- they’re victims of the economic pieces, there’s a national security.  But immigration pays its toll on our people if it’s not done legally.
And this is another example, and it’s why the President is so passionate about this.  But he recognizes that it’s multifaceted, why we have to be tough at the border, why I just read off that this executive order is dealing with people who have committed crimes who local enforcement agencies, our municipalities of -- at the state level are not dealing with it.
And if you go to the ICE website and download this, you’ll see it’s over 30-something pages of cases where there’s a person that is convicted of a crime that local people -- local municipal law enforcement, for whatever reason -- and in some cases they’re prohibited but for one reason or another are not enforcing the law and not turning that individual over to federal authorities to be deported.  And I think this is another example of why this issue needs to be addressed.  
Jon.  
Q    Sean, is the President going to hold Republicans who vote against healthcare accountable?  Are they going to pay a price if they vote against this bill?
MR. SPICER:  I think they’ll probably pay a price at home, meaning I think that you can’t go promise over and over again, since 2010 -- in the case the member has been there that long, but at least for those who have been there that long and at least -- and even the new ones -- this was a major component of the last election.  And I think there is probably not a single Republican member in itself who went out and talked about this.  
And I think when you realize the components of this bill and that the President worked with the House and the Senate to put something together that achieved a promise that was made to voters, yeah, I think there’s going to be a price to be paid, but it’s going to be with their own voters.  And they’re going to have to go back and explain to them why they made a commitment to them and then didn’t follow through.
And one of the things that’s interesting that people who agree or don’t agree with the President in terms of legislative agenda, at least give him high remarks regardless of whether or not they subscribe to his agenda, for keeping his word and his promises.  And I think that’s one of the things that he’s made very clear this morning.
We pledged to the American people at the congressional level, at the Senate level, at the presidential level to go do something.  And this bill, while probably not everybody got everything they wanted, does exactly what we said.  It’s repealing it and replacing it with all of the principles and the aspects that we discussed throughout not only last cycle but in a lot of these cases back through 2010.
Margaret.
Q    Will he campaign against those Republicans?
MR. SPICER:  Let’s get through the vote.  I think one of the things that he made clear this morning was that he was going to make sure that the people who did support this, he would be out there supporting them.  And so I’m not going to focus on the negative as much as the positive today.  And he made it clear to members that for those of you who go out there and keep your word and support it, we’re going to make sure that we remember those who stood by us and who stood by the word that they gave to their voters.
Margaret.
Q    Thanks.  Okay, so I was actually -- that’s one I was going to ask, but let me try to --
MR. SPICER:  Oh.
Q    No, that’s okay, I’ve got another one, don’t worry.  So my other one -- but I’m going to go back to that -- is on the laptop restrictions by the U.S. and now the UK, it certainly sounds like that may have been in response to some kind of a specific security threat.  What can you talk about from the podium in as much specificity as you can, and if you can’t do specifics at least to help us to understand -- are there multiple threats, is there one threat, what is going on here?
MR. SPICER:  So yesterday the TSA announced new enhanced measures on flights inbound to the United States from 10 of more than the 250 countries that have flights coming into the United States that serve as the last point of departure.  I think even ranking member of the House Intelligence Committee, Adam Schiff, who we’ve not always shared the same point of view with, even agreed by saying, “These steps are both necessary and proportional to the threat.”
Elevated [Evaluated] intelligence that we’re aware of indicates that terrorist groups continue to target commercial aviation and are aggressive in pursuing innovative methods to undertake their attacks to include smuggling an explosive device in various consumer objects.  Base on this information, the Secretary of Homeland Security and the TSA administrator determined that it’s necessary to enhance security procedures for passengers at certain last-point-of-departure airports.  
That being said, I’m not going to go any further than that, and I would refer any further comment to the TSA.
Q    Can I try what I was going to try out earlier then?  Mark Meadows -- seems like a nice guy -- and the President seemed like he was kind of joking, but has the President decided in his own mind yet whether he thinks it would be appropriate potentially to mount primary opposition, to campaign for primary opposition in Republican congressional midterms?
MR. SPICER:  Mark Meadows is a long-time early supporter of the President.  He had some fun at his expense this morning during the conference meeting, and I think he continued to express hope that Congressman Meadows, who’s the head of the Freedom Caucus, would continue to see the efforts that have been made to make this better and address a lot of the concerns out there.
But he has made it very clear that he was having fun with him.  The President is committed to making sure that this gets passed.  We’ll go from there.
Vivian.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  First a follow-up to Margaret’s question.  Why wait for the new aviation regulations 96 hours to implement it?  Isn’t the President’s mantra on counterterrorism that we have to kind of sneak up on our enemies, not let them know our tactics?
MR. SPICER:  So I’m going to ultimately you refer you back to TSA, but I will tell you that -- remember that these are 10 airports of last point of departure to the United States out of 250 that come here.  Part of it is to allow -- you have to provide appropriate notification to the host country, to the host airlines, and give them opportunity to get those procedures in place.
I’m not going to comment any further about the security measures that have been taking place or are taking place just to continue to refer you back to TSA.  But I will tell you that I think that implementing something of this nature in that timeframe is pretty darn quick.
Q    Okay, and one more -- sorry, I had a follow-up --
MR. SPICER:  Of course.
Q    Sorry.  Something totally unrelated.  I wanted to ask, has the White House Counsel approved Ivanka Trump getting a West Wing office and clearance?  And so what is the administration’s thinking behind this?  What is she going to do as the --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t think the counsel actually approves office space, but I get your questions.
Q    Right.
MR. SPICER:  Ivanka has taken on several measures to promote high standards of ethical conduct.  Even though she’s not a federal employee, she’ll follow the restrictions that would apply if she were.  She’s taking these steps with advice of counsel and in consultation with the Office of Government Ethics.
Hallie.
Q    Two for you.  One on healthcare, to follow up on the follow-ups.  You’ve made very clear that the President was going to be supporting those who supported the bill.  And I want to talk about the flip side of that, but when he talked this morning in the closed-door meeting about people paying a price, losing seats, not get the majority -- is that an implied threat from the President to the members that don't back this bill
MR. SPICER:  No, I think it's a political reality.  I think if you go out and promise the American people something and your voters something, especially on a scale like this -- and, frankly, as I said, there’s obviously members that have been there one term, two terms, three terms, but this is something that as a party we've made very clear -- if you give us this, American people, we will get this done.  And I think that to go and make a promise and a pledge of this magnitude and not to follow it through, I'm sure that voters would be upset.
And we've seen this in the past.  And it's something that I think the President, as I mentioned earlier, has staked -- has earned high marks for, is keeping his word.  And I think the President was stating a political reality -- if we go out there and make these pledges to the American people and don't do what we've said we've done on these big things, then I don't think they’re going to continue to want to see us in the majority and they’re going to look for an alternative.
Q    And the second, just about -- will he remember the names of those who don't back the bill?  
MR. SPICER:  (Laughter.)  We’ll see.
John Gizzi.
Q    Actually, on yesterday, I just wanted to clarify that.
MR. SPICER:  -- on counting -- it's like CBO.  (Laughter.)  Sorry.  Come on, that was --
Q    Do you want to elaborate on that one?
MR. SPICER:  No, I don't.  Please go ahead.
Q    I do want to ask about the Russia testimony from yesterday.  I know you obviously addressed it from the podium hours ago, but there was sort of this interesting moment that happened a little bit after the briefing, where Director Comey was asked about the live tweets coming from the President in his account at the same time that the hearing was happening.  And Director was fact-checking the President in real time, essentially saying he was incorrect in what he was tweeting.  Is there concern on the part of the White House about the President’s credibility in that situation, that his own Director is correcting his tweets and what he’s saying in real time?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean, let’s just be clear.  I mean, he was answering questions.  I mean, it's not like he was out there -- he was responding to a question.  But again, I think it's important to note, with respect to this -- and I saw a couple comments yesterday -- Senator Coons took issue with a couple of the comments that we made.  Let me just read you -- I know you guys love this when I do this, so I'm just going to entertain you for a second -- Senator Chris Coons -- this is his quote, direct quote -- “I have no hard evidence of collusion.”  Director Clapper, “Not to my knowledge.”  Senator Tom Cotton, “Not that I've seen and not that I'm aware of.”  This is in reference to any type of collusion with Russia that occurred.
Obama’s Acting CIA Director Morell, “There’s smoke but there’s no fire.”  Senator Chuck Grassley after the Comey briefing -- I can say #POTUS and #Clapper are both right, no evidence of Trump collusion with the Russians.
So we've now gone over this on multiple occasions, but at some point there is a distinction between an investigation that goes into Russia’s involvement in 2016 and this continued narrative that falsely tries to link the Trump -- the President or the White House into any of it.  They continue to see that there is nothing there.  Every single person who has been briefed who has come out and publicly talked about it -- Republican, Democrat, former DNI, former CIA directors, Obama appointees -- have said no evidence.
And so I get that -- we keep getting asked --
Q    That's not my question.
MR. SPICER:  But my point is, is that -- that was one of the tweets, though, that he addressed.  He said, former DNI continues to note -- and that was actually true.  These are their quotes.  This is what they’ve said.  So it's not a question -- I think sometimes you come back to us -- at some point, the question has to be to the individuals who said this -- whether it's Chris Coons from Delaware, or former Director Clapper, or former CIA Acting Director Morell -- they’re the ones who’ve said these things on the record.  They’re the ones who’ve been briefed by the intelligence community, by the FBI, and come out and said there is no collusion.
And so, at some point, to fact-check the President for merely quoting them is not -- the question should be directed at them, not us.  But over and over again, it's come to the same conclusion.  
So, Kaitlan.  All right, John.  Then Kaitlan.  That was very nice of you.  It's National Ag Day afterwards --
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Thank you, Kaitlan.  I have two questions.  First, the author David Horowitz, in his book, The Big Agenda, writes of what he calls “a deep state,” in which he said these are Obama holdovers in government who are trying to undercut the President’s agenda.  This has been widely repeated on social media.  Does the President himself believe in this deep state?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I've been asked this question before and I'll give you the same answer I've given before, which is I think there are people that burrow into the government after an administration -- this is going back since the beginning of time. They used to call it ramspecking -- it's suddenly no longer permitted in terms of that same way.  But this has been going on since the country was -- country came to be, where people burrow in after an administration into a civil servant job.  But, sure, there’s people, after eight years of Obama that found their way into government, so it should be no huge secret.
Okay?
Q    Yes.  Another question on -- 
Q    What was that again?
Q    -- that word?
MR. SPICER:  Ramspecking?  Oh, Google it.
Q    I remember -- I remember when --
Q    How do you spell it?
MR. SPICER:  You ever seen my spelling?  Come on.  (Laughter.)  Ramspecking.  It was named after -- we're going to go through a history lesson here, guys.
Q    My other question was, over the weekend, Governor Graco Ramirez, the head of the Mexican Governors Association, was again in Washington, and in a much publicized statement said that Mexico had scored its first victory over the proposed wall.  He said that in the President’s budget there’s a line item for $2.6 billion --
MR. SPICER:  In FY’18.
Q    -- in tax dollars, and no mention of Mexico paying for the wall in any way.  He’s claimed a victory in that.  Your response to Governor Graco Ramirez?
MR. SPICER:  It's a little early to be claiming victory.  I think the President has made it clear that he was going to use the current process to start the construction of the wall and that there would be ways that that fulfillment of that pledge would come true.
Kaitlan.
Q    Thank you.  The administration and the President have repeatedly said that over the next few weeks they will present evidence that he was wiretapped.  And last week he said it would be coming this week and he may speak on it this week.  Can we expect the President to, this week, present evidence that he was wiretapped by Barack Obama?  Or will he speak about it?  Because he didn’t mention it last night in his rally.
MR. SPICER:  Let’s see how the week goes.  
Margaret.
Q    Sean, when we heard from the President before talk about the need for this healthcare plan to pass, he’s talked about the important steps of tax reform and the rest.  At what point do you think that his agenda could be imperiled as you look at the vote count?  Because you're also going to have a further fight, of course, to get any of this through the Senate.
MR. SPICER:  So, at what point will the vote count --
Q    This seems to be such a centerpiece of the rest of the President’s agenda.  So given that it’s still not any -- there’s no certainty in terms of passage at this point, how concerned are you that Thursday could imperil the President’s agenda?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think it’s -- the President’s visit this morning was very well received.  I think we continue down the path to get the votes.  We got a ways to go.  We got to get to the Senate next.  But I think members understand that this is something that has been at the heart of what Republicans have campaigned, and I feel we -- I feel very good headed into this.  The President continues to talk to members, and we're going to make sure that we grow the vote as much as we can.
But with respect to the rest of the agenda, I think all of the issues that the President campaigned on are things that the House and the Senate both look forward to taking up.  Whether it’s trade or immigration or comprehensive tax reform, all of these issues are stuff that many Republicans have campaigned on for a long time and are eager to get going.
The President has made it very clear, as he did last night, as well, that, look, part of the -- we've got to keep moving along if we want to get big things done.  There’s a lot that can be done during this administration, during the first term, and he wants to get as much of it done as possible.  And so the quicker we get repeal and replace done, and put the American Health Care Act in place, the better.  I mean that's just the nature of it.
But I think when you look at the speed in which we've moved, it’s been very responsible.  We've allowed the committees to work their will.  The House has taken up the amendments.  It’s been online.  So this is -- there’s always a balance between jamming it down and getting it done and over with, which is how the Democrats operated at one point when they finally moved on their bill versus how this is done.  But I think we've stricken a very nice balance on this.
Q    At which point will be it Trumpcare?  The President said today it could happen when we asked during the photo spray.
MR. SPICER:  We’ll have to see.  Right now it’s the American Health Care Act, and we're trying to get it done.
Anita.
Q    Two questions.  First, the Kansas legislature is on the verge of possibly passing a Medicaid expansion, and the current version of the healthcare bill does not allow states to pass that.  And so I’m wondering -- as you know most legislatures are currently meeting across the country.  Will there be an exception for states if they expand before any new bill comes to --
MR. SPICER:  It would have to be addressed in the legislation.  I don't believe there’s an exception clause, so I don't -- but I also don't -- it would be -- far be it from me to say at this point, the bill is getting ready to move to the House, the legislation is meeting.  I don't want to prejudge the outcome yet.  But I don't believe from my understanding that there is any kind of like clause that says “if.” 
Q    And secondly, tomorrow -- you mentioned the Congressional Black Caucus.  Is there a specific topic -- healthcare, five topics?  What can you tell us about the President’s message to them?  And how did it come about?  I know there’s been some back and forth on getting a meeting going, how did that come about?  
MR. SPICER:  (Laughter.)  April is -- okay, don't drag April into that.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Didn't say a name, didn't say a name.
MR. SPICER:  This has been something that the President has talked about for a while.  He met with Congressman Elijah Cummings.  He started off in a phone call probably a month or so ago where they discussed prescription drugs and the need to get it down; and then the conversation continued.  Our legislation affairs team early on went to some of their meetings and started having a dialogue with them, and that dialogue continued.  And there was a desire to have a meeting.  The President wanted to have them down.
I think there’s going to be a range of issues that get discussed that range from drug prices to infrastructure, investment in education, HBCUs.  There will be a range, and I think that's part of it.  There’s no set agenda to say we must talk about these things.  And obviously, I think healthcare is going to come up, too.  The President wants to get their idea. Before April jumps out her seat, we'll give her -- 
Q    Thank you for giving a follow-up.  I want to follow up on the CBC, and I have another question on another subject.  So with the CBC, since you're saying you went through all of this prior to the fact that he became President, that there was an effort to reach out to the CBC.  So with all of this understanding that they are an important to deal with in handling some of the issues, the urban issues, or issues that pertain to their community, how does the President plan to move forward in working with them, particularly as some just don’t see eye-to-eye with him?
MR. SPICER:  I think part of it is it continues to have a dialogue, April.  I mean, it's simply sitting down with people, talking about issues, talking about common ground.  I think if you look at the conversation that he began and continued with Congressman Elijah Cummings, they found common ground.  The President talked about areas where, despite some of the narratives that are out there, there were issues that they probably both share concern for and that they can work on together.  And maybe they won't agree on 100 percent or 60 percent, but maybe there's 15, 20, or 30 percent of the issues.  Maybe there's one bill in particular that they can work on. 
But there's a willingness to sit down and talk, and I think that's the first step in the process of any of these.  It's not just your own party -- and the President has shown this on several of these meetings -- where it's not just business leaders.  He's brought in the union leaders.  We talked about healthcare; yesterday, he had Dr. Zeke Emanuel in.  It's not about just bringing in people who agree with you, it's about people across the spectrum who can offer ideas.  And the President -- and I get it that inner cities aren’t exclusive, the rebuilding of inner cities aren’t the only issue.  But he's talked about -- he's elevated the status of Historically Black Colleges and Universities, bringing that office into the White House to help coordinate some of the federal government activities.  He's talked about rebuilding the inner cities.  He's talked about school choice.  A lot of issues that --
Q    Law and order.
MR. SPICER:  Law and order, and healthcare.  And there's issues that impact urban areas, minority communities, whether they live in rural areas or urban areas.  But I think that that dialogue needs to continue because it can only help, and I think that that's what we look forward to tomorrow.
Q    And the second subject -- as you're talking about bringing in groups, you're also bringing in truckers.  And there is a concern in the trucking industry about something like e-logs that's going to happen at the end of the year, where truckers -- be it truckers with commercial trucks, or mom-and-pop businesses -- all of them are going to have computers to log in, to monitor the time you drive, the stop and speed, et cetera.  And many people are saying that it cuts into their income.  Where does the President stand on that?  
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I think let's see if that comes up in the meeting, and I'll have a readout.  But I know --
Q    But even whether it comes up in the meeting --
MR. SPICER:  I understand.  That's more of a DOT issue, so I would refer you to the Department of Transportation.
Q    They're very concerned about it.  Would he at least --
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And I hope that that comes up.
Jeff Mason.
Q    Just a follow-up on the DHS airline issue.  If there is a danger to Americans or to fliers generally with having laptops or things that are bigger than a cellphone in planes from those 10 countries, why would that also not be a danger from other countries?
MR. SPICER:  As you can imagine, I can't talk about the intelligence that we have.  I can just tell you that the steps that are being taken are appropriate and commensurate with the intelligence that we have.  And I'd refer you to the Department of Homeland Security and, specifically, the Transportation Security Administration.
Q    One other question.  
MR. SPICER:  One out of two.
Q    Okay.  The President has traditionally issued a greeting to those celebrating the Iranian New Year, Nowruz.  Will President Trump be doing that today?  
MR. SPICER:  Let me get back to you.  I know that -- I don’t want to get ahead of myself on that, but we may have something for you later.  I've got to check on that.
But thank you, guys, very much.  Let's get back to watching Neil Gorsuch.  And I will see you tomorrow.  We're going to have a week full of briefings.  I'm excited.  And, by the way, I am very happy that the individual in the press corps who took Tom Brady's jersey -- (laughter) -- that that has been returned properly.  Another bad on the press, but we have righted that wrong.  Thank you.
END  
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 3/22/2017, #26
James S. Brady Briefing Room
1:41 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon.  First, at the top, I wanted to note that the President has been briefed on the situation in London.  He just spoke to Prime Minister May, and we’ll have a readout on that situation and that call soon. 
We obviously condemn today’s attack in Westminster, which the United Kingdom is treating as an act of terrorism.  And we applaud the quick response that the British police and their first responders made to the situation.  The victims in this are in our thoughts and our prayers.
The City of London and Her Majesty's government have the 
full support of the U.S. government in responding to the attack and bringing those to justice who are responsible.  We will provide you with further updates as warranted and, as I mentioned, a readout of the President's call with the Prime Minister.
Turning to the events of today -- this morning, the President received his daily intelligence briefing.  He stopped by the Women in Healthcare panel hosted by Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Systems Administrator, Seema Verma.  And also, that event was attended by the Vice President and the Health and Human Services Secretary, Dr. Tom Price.
Healthcare professionals have seen the challenges of implementing Obamacare firsthand.  They're a valuable asset to the President and his team as we continue to consider and enact policies, like the American Health Care Act, that will make healthcare more accessible and affordable for everyone. 
The women who were at the roundtable today represent the physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and administrators who make sure that people around the country receive the necessary preventative and lifesaving care that they need every day.
The doctors who attend to the patients in the family practices, emergency rooms, and clinics -- and those who support them on the administrative and technical sides -- are one of our country’s most treasured resources.
With the passage of the American Health Care Act and the rest of the President’s healthcare reform agenda, everyone, regardless of their financial situation, will be able to take full advantage of this resource.
That’s why, at last count, over 40 major associations have expressed their support for the American Health Care Act, with several of them, including the U.S. Chamber [of Commerce], the National Federation of Independent Businesses, and, just today, the National Taxpayers Union calling it a key vote.
Following his appearance at the panel, the President and his legislative affairs team hosted several members of the House of Representatives for another meeting on the American Health Care Act.  The President acknowledged, as he has before, that the AHCA is only one step in the larger process of fixing the broken healthcare system created by Obamacare, but it’s an essential first step.
Undoing and fixing all of the misguided policies is going to require a holistic, multistep process.  And that’s why the President and his team are fully committed to maintaining an open line of communication with Capitol Hill leadership throughout this entire process. 
Throughout the weeks since the AHCA was first introduced, they have been meeting with Republican members from across the political spectrum, many of whom we’ve seen move from “no” to “yes,” as they learn more about the legislation and amendments that have been adopted.  Continued coordination between administrative and legislative actions will ensure that our new healthcare system is effective and efficient.
This afternoon, the President will meet with the Congressional Black Caucus’s Executive Committee.  The President has brought in and will continue to hear from representatives of all interests as he continues to note that he is the President of all Americans.  Diversity makes our nation strong, and it also means that we don't necessarily agree on every policy item but that we continue to have a dialogue towards productive policies that help America move forward.
The President looks forward to discussing the CBC’s policy priorities and finding ways that they can work together where those priorities align.
This evening, the President will have dinner with Secretary 
of State Tillerson.  Today at the State Department, Secretary Tillerson hosted the foreign ministers and senior leaders of the Global Coalition working to defeat ISIS for the first meeting of the full coalition of 68 members since December 2014.  This meeting follows up on the defense ministerial Secretary Mattis hosted last month in Brussels.
The coalition is united in the fight against ISIS, and this meeting seeks to accelerate international efforts to defeat ISIS in the remaining areas it holds in Iraq and Syria, while maximizing pressure on its branches, affiliates, and networks.
This meeting is a part of our whole-of-government approach to defeating ISIS.  The Trump administration will use all of the tools of national power, in coordination with our international powers [partners], to cut off ISIS’s funding, expand intelligence sharing, and deny ISIS geographic and online safe havens.
Also today, over on the Hill, Judge Gorsuch [is] in his second day of questioning by the Senate Judiciary Committee.  During his nearly 12 hours of questioning yesterday -- now at least I know how someone else feels -- (laughter) -- the judge continued to prove himself an enormously qualified jurist that Americans will all be proud to see on the Supreme Court.  It’s not surprising that Senate Democrats are failing to gain traction for any of their potshots and opposition to Judge Gorsuch.  There’s simply not enough politicizing the Senate Democrats can do to hide the fact that Judge Gorsuch is an immensely qualified and thoughtful jurist with a lifelong dedication to our Constitution.
A few administrative notes here before I take your questions:  Last night, we formally announced that the President will travel to Brussels for the May 25th meeting of NATO heads of state and government.  During this meeting, the President looks forward to reaffirming our strong commitment to NATO and discussing critical issues to the Alliance, especially Allied responsibility-sharing and NATO’s role against -- the fight against terrorism.
The President will also host NATO Secretary General Stoltenberg to the White House on April 12th.
Today, the President declared a major disaster exists in the state of Wyoming and ordered federal assistance to supplement state, tribal, and local recovery efforts in the areas affected by a severe winter storm and straight-line winds that occurred in February.
We also announced that the President will deliver this year’s commencement address at Liberty University on May 13th.
The President is proud to call Liberty’s president, Jerry Falwell, his wife Becki and their entire family, his friends, and looks forward to celebrating the success of this amazing graduating class on such a momentous occasion.
Finally, a few minutes ago, many of you may have seen that the Chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, Devin Nunes, gave remarks on the surveillance collected on individuals associated with the President.  Let me quote him directly:
“I recently confirmed that on numerous occasions the intelligence community incidentally collected information about U.S. citizens involved in the Trump transition.  Details about U.S. persons associated with the incoming administration, details with little or no apparent foreign intelligence value, were widely disseminated in the intelligence community reporting.  And third, I have confirmed that additional names of Trump transition team members were unmasked.  And fourth and finally, I want to be clear, none of this surveillance was related to Russia or the investigation of Russian activities or [of] the Trump team.”
My understanding is that Chairman Nunes is coming to the White House later to brief the President on this development, and we will have a readout for that meeting once it occurs.
With that, I'll be glad to take your questions.  Mara.
Q    Two questions.  One on Nunes and then healthcare.  Is your understanding that this -- none of these unmasked names were leaked?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know.  I literally read the statement -- or heard the statement, came out and briefed it.  It was wrapping up as we were beginning this.
Q    Okay.  Today in the pool spray, the President said "keep your doctor, keep your plan" didn't work out that way.  You didn't get your doctor.  You don't get your plan.  This is one of the reasons we have to repeal Obamacare.  
Is the President assuring people who currently like their plan or like their doctor that under the American Health Care Act they can keep their doctor and their plan?
MR. SPICER:  Well, that's the hope.  And what I mean by that is not to be cute, but last time they were promised something that didn't turn out.  I can't promise something that a doctor stays in a plan or a plan stays there.  But that's a bit different.  
We understand that we're letting market forces come into play here.  Competition.  Doctors can change what insurances they take.  Plans can come in and out of markets.
What I think we can be assured of is a couple of things.  One is that currently under Obamacare, premiums are set to continue to skyrocket.  We've seen an average of 25 percent.  We've noted before in Arizona, they've gone up 116 percent.  I think there’s no question that the additional competition and amendments that have been brought into this discussion will help lower the trajectory of that, number one.
Number two is I think that they're going to see greater choice.  So I think those are the things that we're willing to talk about being part of this plan because you can't -- where they erred last time is went out and made promises that they couldn’t keep.  And I think that one of the problems that they did is that they’ve tried to suppress market forces and competition.  And instead of lowering costs and increasing choice, which is what they sought to do, it did the opposite.  So that's where this is headed, and I think that's important.
John.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  On the AHCA, Mark Meadows, who appears to be a firm no in terms of his opposition to the replacement bill, said that 25 members of the Freedom Caucus are opposed to this replacement bill.  Do you dispute those numbers?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to share our whip count.  I know we saw Lou Barletta, who was a hard no, come out and say he’s yes.  Steve King I believe had been a no; he’s a yes.  Member by member we're seeing tremendous support flow in our direction, and the count keeps getting stronger for us.  So I’m not going to start to get into yes or nos.  But I would just say that former Congressman Mulvaney, now Director of OMB Mulvaney, who is a leader in that caucus, has been a very strong advocate of this policy.  As you know, he’s been up on the Hill talking to his former colleagues, assuring them of the effort and why the process has to go the way it does.
But I’m optimistic in the sense of what we're seeing and the trajectory that this is going, and the number of votes that are flowing our way, not the other way.
Q    And on the confirmation hearing for Judge Neil Gorsuch, I have not seen any Democrat come out in support of Judge Gorsuch just yet.  Do you anticipate that you’ll get Democratic support on this particular nomination? 
MR. SPICER:  I hope and believe so.  I think that there have been several that have been spoken very positively.  I think he’s been extremely impressive throughout this confirmation process, and you've heard members both in the Senate, on the committee, and then a lot of outside voices comment on how well he’s done, how qualified he is.  And I think it’s tough for anybody to say that he’s not immensely qualified for this position. 
Alexis.
Q    Sean, related to Congressman Nunes, can you explain why the White House has agreed to meet with him at all about what his findings are?  And the reason I ask that is because the minute that Director Comey said that there was an official investigate, it might appear as if the White House is interfering with the investigation.  And Congressman Nunes should present his information not to the White House but to the FBI.  So why is anyone here at the White House agreeing to meet with him about his findings? 
MR. SPICER:  We’ll have a readout for you after that meeting.  I think he did this press conference.  He made the announcement that he was coming up to see the President to share these findings.  I don't know who else he’s shared them with.  I don't know -- to your question, I don't know if he’s briefed anyone else on it in terms of the intelligence community -- either Admiral Rogers or Comey -- of whether this is something they shared with him.  
But I think after the meeting, hopefully depending on the classification level, we may be able to share more on that with you.
Q    Can I just add, is the President concerned at all that there will be an appearance immediately, today that he has interfered with an ongoing investigation -- whether it’s a congressional investigation or the executive branch investigation by meeting privately with a congressman who says he has information?
MR. SPICER:  So let me get this straight.  Number one, we asked -- as you know, two weeks ago, we said this was the appropriate venue.  
Number two, you guys have asked us over and over again, why aren’t we meeting with certain individuals.  The chairman of the committee that -- one of the two committees that we asked to look into this -- wants to share his findings, or what he knows.  I think that is exactly how we’ve talked about this working.  But I would leave it to Congressman Nunes to come up, and to brief and share his thoughts.  I don’t know what his plan is.  Obviously, he sat -- he briefed the media before he briefed us.  He went down and talked about what he had found.  
So, you know, it’s interesting, I didn’t see any complaints from you guys when he went down and held a press conference for the umpteenth time talking about his findings and what he's found.  There is no complaints from the media when he shares what he has found with you guys.  But when he wants to come up here and tell us, this is where the investigation stands and here’s what I've unloaded -- or excuse me, learned -- there’s seems to be a little bit of an interesting double standard on that.
Q    Just to close the loop, because the President said that he had additional information that he believed the White House or he or his representatives would present, related to this investigation, what Congressman Nunes has is not related to that?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- you’re asking me questions that -- he has not briefed us.  He has not briefed the President.  You guys, as I noted -- he actually went down and spoke to the media before he shared this with us.  
So I would ask the colleagues that of yours that ask questions, more than you have -- you've had -- collectively, the media has more of an opportunity to ask questions and to hear what he has to say than we do at this point.  So once we have more to understand what he said, to the extent that we can, I’m sure we’ll be glad to share it with you.  But the media has more information than we do at this point.
Jon.
Q    Sean, staying on that, didn’t we already know that there was incidental collection of intelligence involving some members of the transition team?  And I point to --
MR. SPICER:  Not the way you guys ask the questions.  I mean, you questioned us every day about what we knew, and now you’re coming back to me saying, didn’t we already know this.  Well -- I’m doing somewhat of an effective job.
Q    No, but didn’t we already know that Flynn was monitored in his conversations with Kislyak?
MR. SPICER:  Right.  
Q    So we know --
MR. SPICER:  Again, I guess my point, John, is I don’t know.  He made a statement, went down to the press.  Until we get briefed on this, until the President gets briefed, I don’t know what he knows.  And so to ask -- until that occurs, and until we have the ability to share some of that in an unclassified nature, I don’t want to get ahead of it.  I don’t know what he knows.  That’s why, apparently, he’s coming up to share his findings with the President.  At least that’s what he said.  Again, let’s wait and see how this unfolds.
Q    And on the American Health Care Act, Mark Meadows says they don’t have the votes, they need to start over and do a new bill.  That sounds like you’re in pretty serious trouble.
MR. SPICER:  No, that sounds like one member’s opinion.  As I mentioned --
Q    Who represents a large contingent of people who oppose the bill.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, but again, I just named a few of the members that are part of that caucus that have come on board.  I think that -- look, every day, you see more and more of those members from that caucus and throughout the entire conference express their support for the bill.  The President was up yesterday for a while talking to them.  
We’ve had members -- and the Vice President has been actively engaged -- Mick Mulvaney, Reince Priebus, Marc Short and Rick Dearborn, who lead our leg affairs team.  These guys have been flooding the Hill.  They’ve been on the phone, having meetings with them.  There’s been a series of members up here all day.  I think the trajectory is going very well for us.
Q    And Heritage Action says you can easily fix this bill simply by removing the regulatory framework -- the tax credits and all of that -- and you’ll get massive buy-in from conservatives.  But can you do that?
MR. SPICER:  There are certain constraints that we have in the reconciliation process.  And for those who are steeped in the arcane rules of the Senate, there's a thing called the Byrd Rule, and it does not allow policy to be recreated.  It has to do with the budgetary nature of that vehicle to get -- that’s sustainable at 50 votes.  Right now, there are certain things that I think a lot of people would like but that will not potentially get ruled in order by the Senate parliamentarian.  
So I understand what people want, but I think that we have created a vehicle to get this done.  This is the only way that we will repeal and replace Obamacare.  And again, I think people have to recognize that there is a three-step process to doing this.  This is exactly how the Democrats enacted it, and this is exactly how we will unwind it and implement a much better system.  That’s it, plain and simple.  
Margaret. 
Q    Sean, I know you can’t get ahead of Nunes, but what he said was, incidental, legal surveillance using a FISA warrant, which would --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t believe he said FISA warrant.
Q    He did.
MR. SPICER:  Did he?  Okay.
Q    He did.  And that’s why I’m asking this question, which is, does the Trump administration have the presumption that foreign leaders or foreign nationals will not be surveilled when they are in contact with --
MR. SPICER:  No, look, again, as I said, I don’t want to start talking or guessing what he may say or may not say, or explain this.  I think that we will have more information, or I hope to have more information once the President is briefed, and to find out what else has gone on in terms of additional information on this.  But I do think it is a startling revelation and there's a lot of questions that need to get asked.  I think it's interesting all of the questions are in the presumptive negative towards us, as opposed to "why was this taking place, why were people surveilled ostensibly; they were involved in the campaign."  Because it's not --
Q    Well, that's why I'm trying to clarify that --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, the question is -- the question --
Q    -- was your presumption that foreign nationals --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, it's not a presumption.  Actually, I'm not the one --
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. SPICER:  Right.  Respectfully, I'm not the one with the presumption -- you guys are.  I didn’t come up here presuming anything.  I actually started my comments off by saying that --
Q    Well, I would presume that foreign nationals are being monitored by U.S. intelligence when they are talking to anyone.  
MR. SPICER:  And then the question -- I think there's a series of questions, which is, how many times was an individual picked up?  Why were they picked up?  Were they unmasked?  Again, a lot of this, if they're picked up during a FISA warrant, is that American citizens are prohibited by law from being unmasked, from "having their name put out there."  Why would someone's name get put out there?  What ways were they described?  There's a lot of questions that need to get asked.  Those are the relevant issues that need to get asked.  How many times was one individual followed?  Did their name get unmasked, and why?  But there's a lot of things that need to get followed up on.  We're not at that position yet, as I've said now multiple times.  The Chairman is going to come up here, brief the President, I don’t know to what extent and to what detail.  But hopefully, as we move forward, we will have more.  
Q    Is this what you've been -- because you've said there's more information to come, more information to come.  Is this what you've been gesturing towards?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know.  For the eighth time, there is no -- we don’t know what he's going to come up here and explain and share.  And until that happens, for me to talk about where we think this is headed -- again, we're not in the business of trying to get to this point yet.  We say, this is what they have.  We've asked that the investigation be conducted and that people gather up information.  What they have and to what extent, we'll know soon. 
April. 
Q    Sean, I have a series of questions on a topic.  Gwen Carr, the mother of Eric Garner, met with an official here at the White House yesterday.  She's looking for fairness and justice in her son's case.  What should we expect to come out of that meeting with this White House official?  Should there be a push to make sure that there is an indictment of the police officer's --
MR. SPICER:  I mean, that's a Department of Justice question.  For us to get involved in a case, a specific case, would be highly inappropriate in terms of trying to guess what the outcome of a case should be.
Q    Well, along that line, the official, according to Ms. Carr, reached out to the Department of Justice, the civil rights division, had the wrong number; called another department, had the right number.  Now, in previous administrations, to include the Obama administration and other administrations, the Department of Justice had limited the numbers of people to call over to the Department of Justice.  Has the Attorney General, this Attorney General Sessions, changed that memo?  What has he done?
MR. SPICER:  Well, it would have to be reissued.  That's a separate issue in terms of -- every Attorney General issues a memo going back to, I think, Mukasey was the first one -- post-Watergate -- I'm trying to remember who issued the first one.  But it has been a practice of I think almost every Attorney General to issue a memo spelling out the procedures that officials in the Justice Department contact the White House and who they can contact, and the nature of which and what their exceptions are, et cetera.  Those memos get crafted by each administration, by each new Attorney General. 
I would refer you back to the Department of Justice on the status of that under this Attorney General.
Q    So how many officials here have that right, to call the Department of Justice, even if it's for --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know the answer.  I would refer you to the Department of Justice.
Q    But was there wrongdoing in this effort to call over to the Department of Justice?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know.  I don’t know the nature of -- I'll have to look into what you're asking.  But I would, again, refer you back to the Department of Justice.
Hunter.
Q    Yes.  Thank you, Sean.  I have two quick questions.  Last November, President Trump dismissed reports he was trying to obtain security clearances for his children as "a typically false news story."  Now there are reports Ivanka Trump is indeed attempting to obtain a clearance.  What changed there?
MR. SPICER:  Well, at the time, it was not true.  I mean, she wasn’t obtaining a security clearance, so it was not accurate then.  There was no -- I think we addressed it during the transition.  An official had actually just inquired.  There was no actual attempt at the time.  The official in question was removed from the transition team.  They had merely made an inquiry into what it would take to get an SF-86 process moving forward.  No paperwork was ever drawn, no account was opened, and that official was let go.
At this time, as I mentioned yesterday, Ivanka has decided to go above and beyond, and act in certain ways to ensure that she complies with certain rules by maintaining the Federal Records Act, getting a security clearance so that if she is privy to any information that is classified, she has to abide by the same rules and regulations in terms of being in a room and how it's handled, et cetera.  We have taken appropriate measures to do that.  I mentioned the statement yesterday and will stick by it.
Q    And then the second question on Paul Manafort.  The Associated Press has published a report based on documents that he had a plan to "benefit" Vladimir Putin for a client.  And with him back in the headlines, I'm just wondering if you still stand by the comment that he had a "limited role" on the campaign.  And if you could explain a little bit more about how spending months as the campaign's top official is a limited role.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, thank you.  I've tried to avoid commenting.  I know I've talked to a lot of you about the individual stories, but I think obviously this one has started to catch a lot of buzz.  So to comment briefly on this, I think nothing in this morning's report referenced any actions by the President, the White House, or any Trump administration official.  I think that's got to be clear from the get-go.  
The report is entirely focused on actions that Paul took a decade ago regarding -- he's a former advisor of the campaign, and the actions that came to light this morning are about a client that he had last decade.  
I know I commented on this the other day, and clearly I should have been more precise with respect to Paul's role.  So let me clarify this and kind of go through the facts.  Paul was hired to oversee the campaign's delegate operation.  He had played a significant role in the convention and delegate operations of four previous Republican nominees -- Bob Dole, former Presidents George H. Bush, Ronald Reagan and Gerald Ford.  And to be clear, he got the job done on the delegates.  The President won the Republican nomination after months of speculation after a potentially contested contest -- convention.
In total, he was involved with the campaign for a total of just under five months.  He was first hired on March 28th to oversee delegate operations.  He was made the chief strategist and campaign chairman on May 19th.  And his relationship with the campaign ended on August 19th.  
The AP story focuses on his activities from the last decade.  And to place in to context, Paul represented many foreign clients, according to publicly available data, in the Caribbean, Asia, Africa and Europe.  His representation of foreign clients is public and similar to the work of Tony Podesta, a Clinton campaign fundraiser, whose brother John chaired Hillary Clinton's campaign.
Last year -- not last decade -- Tony Podesta lobbied against sanctions for Russia's largest bank.  And John Podesta, Clinton's campaign chair, sat on the board of a Russian-based energy company.  This was something tied to Hillary Clinton, who was the face of the failed Russia reset policy.  So it's not even close -- what we're talking about now isn't even close to her most significant role with respect to Russia.
As Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, along with the Obama administration, approved a deal that gave Russia one-fifth of America's uranium reserves.  Hillary's husband, former President Bill Clinton, received over half a million dollars by a paid speech by a bank connected to the uranium deal.  And Vladimir Putin personally called the former President and thanked him for giving the speech.
So an individual who worked for less than -- the campaign for five months for the President's two-year long campaign, who worked with a Russian entity a decade ago, is the subject of rampant media speculation all day long, even though the Clintons had much more expensive -- extensive ties, while Secretary of State Hillary was crafting a policy she said was designed "strengthen Russia."
And to be clear, the President has no personal financial dealings with Russia.  His ties are limited to hosting a contest in Russia once, and selling a Palm Beach home to a businessman in 2005.  That's it.  
And for members of the media trying to conflate Paul's role in activities with Monday's hearing, I have another reminder:  Numerous individuals, including former Obama Director of National Intelligence, James Clapper, and acting CIA Director Mike Morrell and members of the intelligence community from both parties who have been briefed have said across the board that they have seen zero evidence of any collusion between the Trump campaign and Russian officials.  And that's not going to be changed by former business dealings of a campaign staffer from a decade ago.
Sara.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  You and other senior administration officials have sought to assure skeptical Republican lawmakers that phase two of these regulatory modifications will address some of their concerns.  So what is Secretary Tom Price waiting for?  Why not roll out phase two now if the vote is looking like it's going to be a very close marker?
MR. SPICER:  I think in some of those cases -- and it's tied to -- it's all one package, and that's why I think you saw some of the stuff he is working on, some of the stuff he is doing.  But I think the important piece is to get the phase-one part of it done.  He has assured them and talked to them about different administrative actions.  
Again, part of this is sequencing.  I mean, the same way that in Obamacare they didn’t just have Kathleen Sebelius then go out and start implementing things.  They passed the bill first through the reconciliation process, got that done, and then she did the administrative piece.  We're doing the same process because of how some of the sequencing has to occur.  And then the same thing on the legislative front, we've introduced in the House -- all those pieces of legislation have been done.  Leader McCarthy has started to talk about the, that do all of the prong -- three steps.  
So a lot of it is coming together, but part of it is, is a sequencing aspect that needs to get taken care of.  But we are moving in the right direction.
Can I go to John (inaudible) for the first question on Skype?
Q    Yes.  Good afternoon, Sean, from (inaudible) in Newport.  Sean, you have a lot of members of the media saying that President Trump -- the President to all the people.  What does the President say -- (inaudible)?  Yesterday, you had (inaudible) White House grandstanding at the confirmation hearing.  We've had Elizabeth Warren (inaudible), the Boston Globe condemning the (inaudible).  You had Rhode Island Governor, Gina Raimondo, boycott.  You had (inaudible) while she fundraised around the country.  What's the President saying to frustrated Trump supporters who don’t feel they're getting proper representation (inaudible) and in Congress?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean, I think with respect to Judge Gorsuch, which is I think -- pretty clear that's where you're headed on this --
Q    Yes.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  I just -- I mean, when you look at the praise, I mean, obviously I would love for it to be universal.  And while we've gotten bipartisan praise from pundits and former law clerks in both parties, high number of jurists and former people -- legal scholars, members of Congress, we're not going to win everybody.  And I think that Democrats have tried to score some points on the committee.  They've largely fallen by the wayside.  And we've seen very high praise for him.
So I would just suggest that anybody who's got a problem with him, I'd love to hear it, because so far most of the issues -- no one seems to have a problem with his academic credentials, his record or anything else.  So I'm pretty buoyed by a lot of what we've seen come out of Capitol Hill with respect to him.
Blake.
Q    Sean, thanks.  Do you take the House Freedom Caucus at their word, Mark Meadows at their word?  There are at least two dozen or so who are "nos."  So how do you get from this point right now policy-wise to tomorrow -- something, anything that maybe might flip that?
MR. SPICER:  I think we're doing it.  I mean, piece by piece, member by member, we're getting there, and we're getting much closer.  The last couple days we've continued to do that.  But then today alone, I mentioned a couple of the other members.  Slowly but surely we're getting there, and I feel confident that when the vote comes up, we'll have the votes.
Q    And let me ask you today, Patrick McHenry, congressman, deputy whip, described the President, as members of Congress were coming in here to the White House, as the "closer."  Do you embrace that label?
MR. SPICER:  He is the closer.
Q    Do you embrace that label here as it relates to healthcare?
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.  Ayesha.
Q    You just said that you're confident that the healthcare bill will pass tomorrow.  I want to get a sense of how confident you are.  I don’t know if you want to rate your percentage on it.  Like, how confident are you that the bill will pass?  And if it doesn’t pass, is there a plan B?
MR. SPICER:  No, there is no plan B.  There's plan A and plan A.  We're going to get this done.
Q    And so you're confident -- 100 percent confident?
MR. SPICER:  We're going to get it done.  That's it -- plain and simple.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  I know you said you didn’t know what information you were going to find out today from Chairman Nunes, but my question for you is, when did the President know about this surveillance that the Congressman brought up today on Capitol Hill?  He spoke late last week about -- we'll find out more information that would support these wiretapping claims.  Is this the information he was talking about?
MR. SPICER:  Until Chairman Nunes briefs him, we don’t know what he knows versus what the President has been made aware of.  And so how that jives, I don’t know.  I hope to have more for you later.
Q    And a quick follow-up on healthcare and just a quick follow-up on Asia.  Does the President believe the healthcare bill will pass the House tomorrow?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Jonathan.
Q    Two questions on Paul Manafort.  Did the President know that he had worked to advance Putin’s interests previous to becoming the campaign chairman?
MR. SPICER:  No, the President was not aware of Paul’s clients from last decade.  No.
Q    But is that a problem?  You know, now that all this is coming out and there is a whole lot scrutiny --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, but what is coming up?  What else don’t we know?  I mean, where he went to school, what grades he got, who played he played with in the sandbox?
Q    Well, you didn’t know that Michael Flynn was --
MR. SPICER:  Okay, I -- thanks, Peter.  I’m answering a question -- 
Q    We're all part of the conversation.  
MR. SPICER:  No, you’re not, actually.
The answer to your question is, I think to talk about someone having a client from 10 years ago that had a consulting company with clients from around the world --
Q    He paid millions of dollars to advance Putin’s interests.  I mean, that’s enough -- 
MR. SPICER:  Well, I don’t know what he got paid to.  If you listen to what Paul --
Q    The documents said --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  I understand.  I’m going to answer your question, if you give me a second.  That he was a consultant, he had clients from around the world.  There is no suggestion that he did anything improper.  But to suggest that that President knew who his clients were from a decade ago is a bit insane.  There is not -- he was not a government employee.  He didn’t fill out any paperwork attesting to something.  There is nothing that he did that suggests, at this point, that anything was nefarious.  He was hired to do a job; he did it.  That’s it -- plain and simple.
Q    I’m just saying, given that it was such a focus -- you brought it up just then with Hillary Clinton, that these were corrupt arrangements and that the Clinton Foundation was described as a criminal enterprise, and there was all this discussion of Russia.  And you've pointed out --
MR. SPICER:  There is a big difference between -- there was dollars -- hold on --
Q    I understand.  I'm not conflating the President.  I’m just asking, is he disappointed, now that he has found this out, that there was this --
MR. SPICER:  Found out what, Jonathan?  That he had a client over a --
Q    That he was working for Putin, for a lot of money.
MR. SPICER:   -- in the past decade, he had a client, and you’re worried about what?  That he held -- I mean --
Q    That he was doing work to advance Putin’s interests.
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know what work he was doing.  So to suggest that just because he had a client in the past decade that no one is suggesting was anything improper -- he was hired to count delegates, which is what he did, and he was successful at it, as he had done for George Herbert Walker Bush, Gerald Ford, and Bob Dole.  He was hired to do a job, and he did it, and he did it fine.  So --
Steven.
Q    Sean, why did the President fire Paul Manafort?
MR. SPICER:  Well, for two reasons.  One is, I think, that there were some issues coming up with his ties to Ukraine that were becoming a distraction.  And secondly, he was, I think, sixteen points down at the time.  And he was down in the 20s in women.  And I think the President recognized that he needed to make a change for those two reasons.
Q    Second question on healthcare.  As confident and as optimistic as you are -- if at this point tomorrow you don’t have the magic number -- should the Speaker pull the bill from the floor?
MR. SPICER:  No, this is it.  If you want to see Obamacare repealed and replaced, this is the vote, this is the time to act.  This is what people have told the American people is going to happen.  This vote needs to happen.  If you’re waiting for your chance, this is it.  We need to act.
Cheryl.
Q    Thank you.  Wall Street appears to be getting a little nervous about the possibility of tax reform this year.  Can you say definitively that the President will present a package of tax reforms this year?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Darlene.
Q    What time is the President expected to meet with Chairman Nunes this afternoon? 
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- I was walking out as the Chairman was reiterating -- I literally heard him on the streaming -- like, on the -- you know, his comments -- as he was saying them.  So I don’t know that it was scheduled.  The President was wrapping up a call with Prime Minister May at the time that I walked out, so I don’t know what was scheduled.
Q    And was there any consideration given to not meeting with the Chairman given the appearance --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know.  I just know what the Chairman said he was doing.  I walked out of here before anything had been finalized.  He was still wrapping up the call with Theresa May at the time.
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  You said the President is the closer, there is no plan B, tomorrow is it.  So if you --
MR. SPICER:  You’ve done a very good job, Zeke.  (Laughter.)  You guys better be careful, he’s going to put you out of work.
Q    So if tomorrow night’s outcome doesn’t go your way, if the vote fails, what should we then read into the President’s ability to negotiate and close deals; the White House’s ability to plant any sort of legislation and a legislative --
MR. SPICER:  Look -- and I know what you’re trying to get me to -- but we feel very good about the trajectory of this.  Members continue to come with us.  The number is going higher and higher, not lower and lower.  So the trajectory is great.  As I mentioned, everybody is out there -- full court press on this, and this is opportunity for anybody who wants to see this done.  
But I just want to be clear, we have a robust agenda -- tax reform, as I just mentioned, trade, immigration.  There’s a lot of other things that need to get done.  And I think there’s continued to be widespread support.  In a lot of cases, bipartisan support for the President’s agenda.  And so we’re going to continue to roll on in that.  But we feel very good about where we are now.
Mark.
Q    Sean, I was going to ask, in terms of after the vote tomorrow night, for those Republicans who decide to not support the White House, what kind of relationship -- any change in the relationship -- would they see going forward?  Would they expect to see maybe a primary challenge later on?  Or this is one of those things where they can vote their conscience if they really believe this isn’t the bill?
MR. SPICER:  I think we’re obviously -- we believe that this is a great opportunity to achieve the principles that we laid out to the American people.  We’re not looking -- this is not -- the President made clear yesterday when he visited with the conference, he’s not there to threaten them; he’s there to explain political landscape to them, and to explain that -- I think that when you keep your promise, no matter what business you’re in, you tend to be rewarded -- whether it’s your customers or your friends, your family, your voters -- that Washington for too long has suffered a deficit of trust, and that we made very clear to the American people, if you gave us this opportunity and this honor to govern, that we would get certain things done.  And this was at the top of that list.  
And this bill represents the best chance of repealing and replacing Obamacare and instilling a patient-centric healthcare system that increases choice and lowers cost, and that this is the only train leaving the station.
Jonathan. 
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Sean, would then-candidate Donald Trump have hired Paul Manafort, such an important and prominent position in his campaign, if he had known that he had had a $10 million contract with somebody so close to Vladimir Putin to “greatly benefit the Putin government”?  If he had known that, would he have hired him?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know.  I don’t want to -- Paul was hired, as I said, to count delegates.  That’s why he was brought in, as he had been for George W. Bush, Gerald Ford, Bob Dole.  He did his job.  That’s what he was there for.  And --
Q    And to run the campaign.  I mean, he was chairman of the campaign.
MR. SPICER:  No, no.  After, what, May 19th or something.  But again, I’m not going to --
Q    And to run the convention.  I mean, you’ll notch it was a very prominent role.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah -- as he had done for the other three.  He had held very significant -- look, so again, you’re basically saying, hey, the work that he did, he had a client a decade ago, would he have -- I don’t know the answer to that --
Q    $10 million to promote the interests of Vladimir Putin.
MR. SPICER:  The answer to your question -- I don’t know.  To look back right now and to say, if we knew now what we know then, would we have done things different?  I don’t know.  That’s a question that the President would have to weigh at the time.
Q    But he definitely didn’t know.  
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    You’re saying he didn’t know.
MR. SPICER:  No, he did not know.  
Q    He had not idea that Manafort had done this.
MR. SPICER:  Of course, not.  To suggest that he -- I mean, that’s like -- you can think about how many people are involved in a campaign of some sort.  And granted, in this campaign it was run lean and mean.  But to suggest that everybody knew everybody’s background -- did they pay their taxes, how much did they pay, what deductions did they take, who did they work for in the --
Q    Shouldn’t he have disclosed that?  I mean, he did work for --
MR. SPICER:  Disclosed what?  That he had done --
Q    He had worked on behalf of an adversary of the United States.  He got a $10 million contract.  
MR. SPICER:  Again, I’m not here to vouch for what he did or how -- I don’t know.
Q    -- but the President would want to know, wouldn’t he?
MR. SPICER:  Maybe.  Maybe, maybe not.  I don’t know what the circumstances were at the time, and I don’t know what exactly -- so for me to start to infer that what he did or did not do was anything improper is not appropriate at this time.  I don’t know what work he did.  I know what he was hired to do, and he did his job.
Shane.
Q    I want to ask about Paul Manafort here, too.  Are you saying he wasn’t disappointed to learn, in the last 24 hours, that his chief strategist worked for Vladimir Putin’s --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- no, no -- because again, you’re --
Q    What was his reaction --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know, because the story that came out this morning said that he had had client.  Paul has put out a statement that suggests this is what he did, this is how he handled it, there were -- I mean, you’ve all read the same.  We have not spent a ton of time going to investigate what he did for that client a decade ago.
Q    Is the President disappointed to learn that this was --
MR. SPICER:  I really have not discussed the President’s -- I know what he has made very clear:  He hired him to do a job, he did the job well, he got him over the finish line.  On August 19th, he was let go of the campaign for the reasons that I have mentioned.
Q    Can you say if Paul Manafort played any role in the hiring of any people in the federal government after the election?  Did he advise the President?
MR. SPICER:  Not to my knowledge, at all.
John.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Going back to the American Health Care Act, there was always nervousness that moving too quickly on it would leave some very dangerous points in the details.  Several publications, including Sara’s, reported today that as a result of a change of a few words, veterans who benefitted from a program called Veterans Affairs, or had the option of getting tax credits, would not get neither under the new legislation, and that 7 million veterans would be cost healthcare.  Is the administration following this, and is urging Congress to do anything about it?
MR. SPICER:  Most veterans get their healthcare either through TRICARE or through Medicare, if they’re over 65 or a combination thereof, correct?
Q    Well -- but there’s two programs.  One is the Veterans Affairs program, and the other is the option -- this is under the current law -- to have tax credits.  And my understanding, again, from Sara’s publication this morning and several others, is that 7 million veterans could possibly lose both under this program.
MR. SPICER:  I would have to follow-up with you.  I’m not aware of any modifications to TRICARE in particular that would have that effect.
Kristen.
Q    Sean, thanks.  On Monday, the President accused former President Obama and Democrats of rushing through the healthcare law -- jamming it through -- when, in fact, they actually debated it for about a year.  This healthcare law was rolled out about 15 days ago.  So don’t you run the risk of rushing this through, of not giving it enough time for public debate?
MR. SPICER:  I think Republicans have talked about repealing and replacing Obamacare since 2010.  We’ve campaigned on it in every election since.  The principles that are in a lot of these have been very public for a long time.  And --
Q    Understood.  But you just rolled out the specifics, Sean.  You just rolled out the actual --
MR. SPICER:  And it’s gone through three committees, two of which had unanimous Republican support.
Q    Just a few days ago.  
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  But we’re working it through the process.  This was something the President campaigned on, told the American people would be his top priority.  Republicans who ran for the House and Senate said that it would be a top priority.  It’s something that they talked about for seven years, Kristen.  So to suggest that we’re rushing anything -- I think we’ve done this very, very, very deliberately, and very responsibly to make sure that people could read it.  
So again, with all due respect to the folks who tackled this in the past, we actually put the bill online, let everyone in the entire world read it, didn’t jam it through and, to quote former Speaker Pelosi, say, if you want to read the bill, wait until we pass it.  We actually let the American people and the entire world read what was in it, watch the process occur, and I think that is a much more open and transparent process.
Q    Let me just ask you a quick question about the terror attack.  You said that the President has been briefed.  He also spoke with Prime Minister Theresa May.  Can you give us any more information about who may have been behind it?  And should Americans have any concern, or are there any security changes that they should expect --
MR. SPICER:  No, that would be highly irresponsible at this point.  I know the British government is investigating this as an act of terrorism at this moment.  So for me to sort of get out and ahead of -- I know our homeland security team and our national security team are in contact with them.  Secretary Tillerson has issued a statement, as has Homeland Security Secretary Kelly.
So we are continuing to monitor the situation.  We’re in touch with officials in the British government.  As I mentioned, as I was walking out here, the President was finishing up a call with Prime Minister May, and so we’ll try to have an additional readout to you, to the extent that that’s possible.  But we’re going to provide the assistance we can to the British government to help get to the bottom of this.  At this time, it would be highly irresponsible for us to get out in front of British officials.  
Charlie.
Q    You mentioned that there is no plan B, that plan A is the only vehicle -- the only train leaving the station, I believe you said.  Does that mean if the plan fails -- if the bill fails, will the President move on to other issues he’s concerned about, like trade, and leave Obamacare in place?  And if so, how long is he comfortable with leaving it in place?
MR. SPICER:  Well, as I mentioned -- I mean, we’re not going to leave it in place because we’re going to repeal and replace it tomorrow, move it through the Senate, and the President will sign the bill.  We continue to see the enthusiasm and momentum coming to our direction.  So I’m not looking -- as I mentioned, we’re not looking at a plan B.  We have plan A, it’s going to pass, and we’re going to go from there.
Jessica.
Q    I’m going to talk about China for moment.  Do you now have the ability to formally announce the dates for when President Xi visits the United States?
MR. SPICER:  I do not know at this time.
Q    Why not?
MR. SPICER:  Because that’s not how it works.  Because that’s something that we continue to work with President Xi and the Chinese government to coordinate the final dates and times.  And then obviously we coordinate the announcement with them as well.  But trust me, when we’re ready, we’ll let you and everyone else know.
Q    And are you going to be prepared to talk about the parameters of the bilateral relationship at that time?
MR. SPICER:  I’m sure that -- my guess is there will be a lot to discuss at that time.
Jeff.
Q    Sean, has the President asked the FBI director or the NSA or any other agencies involved to come here to the White House and brief him on this new information, or is it just the intel chair?  And if so, why not?
MR. SPICER:  Well, Jeff, it just happened.  So it’s a silly question to ask me, literally as I’m walking out here, when the Chairman was wrapping up an event saying that he is announcing that he is coming down here.  It’s not like we picked up the phone and then called everyone else.  The first step is to actually hear what he has to say and to find out who else he’s briefed, where he’s got that information from, and then we’ll take the next steps going forward.  
Q    Is this the first of several meetings, though?  Do you believe he would like to have the FBI director come in? 

MR. SPICER:  I don’t know.  It’s literally -- it literally just happened as I was walking out here.  So to suggest that other steps have occurred, until that briefing occurs we’ll see what this leads to.  I don’t know.
Q    What’s the state of his credibility tonight?  The Wall Street Journal, which has been very supportive of his candidacy and agenda, simply raised a question that he is not doing very well, and they said he could be on the verge of being a “fake President.”  What do you believe the state of his credibility is as we sit here today in week nine?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President has made several promises to the American people, and he’s kept them.  He appointed Neil Gorsuch as the judge, which was one of 20 people on a list.  He withdrew from the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  He established a five-year lobbying ban and a foreign ban on -- lifetime, which is all what he said he was going to do.  
He said he was going to cut regulations, and he did that.  He said he was going to start to bring back jobs -- he did that.  He said that he was going to start to pay real attention and respect taxpayers, bringing down costs.  He’s already done that.  He’s backed a plan to repeal and replace Obamacare.  We’ve talked about that ad nauseam.  He’s talked about putting forth a budget that puts defense first -- he did that.  He took action on Dakota and Keystone Pipeline -- he did that.
I think when it comes to the President making promises to the American people and keeping them, he’s got a pretty high record of doing it.
Peter.
Q    Sean, if I could ask you about the conversation we’ve been having about Paul Manafort, but not specific to Paul Manafort.  When Michael Flynn’s name came up at the time, having not registered as a foreign agent, there was a lot of focus on the vetting process that goes into individuals.  Back then you said, “We trust people to fill out the appropriate forms that they need to.  He has been very” -- referring to the President -- “he has been very committed to making sure we institute high standards here and we’re held to them.”
So given your words, is it sufficient to trust the information that the people you hire give you?  And can you say with certainty with right now that there isn’t anybody else that’s working in the interests of another foreign government working for this government right now?
MR. SPICER:  It’s a good question, Peter, because there’s a big difference between working for a campaign or an entity where there’s no forms to fill out -- when you work for the United States government, especially here in the White House, you fill out a security clearance form, you fill out an employment form that asks certain questions under the penalty of law.
Those questions -- 
Q    And Michael Flynn still got through, I guess.  
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  No, well -- but again, he filled out forms under the penalty of law.  I don’t know what was on his forms or what not was on his forms.  Remember, what the President let him go for was not being truthful to the Vice President, not necessarily for what was on a form, which I do not know what he filled out or did not fill out.
If somebody fills out a form here, an SF-86, a security clearance form, or another employment document, and lies on that form or misleads, then they’re going to face the penalty of law on that.  That’s a big difference between saying when someone was hired on a campaign or another entity, that they should disclose everything in their past whether or not they -- who their clients were.  But again, I mean, if someone presented a résumé and it was faulty, sure, I think that if that was -- as you recall, there was another person during the transition that was named to a position that was discussed as not being truthful with some of their works.  We let them go.
People write things.  They have jobs.  They describe themselves a certain way.  And every time that I’m aware of that we’ve had an incident where someone has not been forthright and truthful, we’ve let them go.  But when you work for the United States government, you actually fill out security clearance forms, employment forms under the penalty of law.  None of those cases occurred in the past.  And to dredge up someone’s work from a decade ago -- it’s not that Paul wasn’t truthful, just to be clear -- you’re trying to conflate something that’s there.  You’re trying to make the accusation that somehow he was dishonest or distruthful.
Q    I’m not asking about Paul Manafort --
MR. SPICER:  No, you are.
Q    I’m not asking about Paul Manafort at all.
MR. SPICER:  Who are you asking about?
Q    In fact, what I’m asking is, can you say with certainty that right now -- that there’s nobody working for this White House that is presently working in the interest of a foreign government?
MR. SPICER:  I can tell you that every form has been filled out -- 
Q    So you trust that the information is --
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.  You’ve got to -- people who are filling out forms -- so to sit here and ask me whether I can vouch for -- whatever it is -- a few hundred people that have filled out everything, that would be ridiculous for me to stand here and suggest that I possibly could.
What I can tell you is, under the penalty of law, every single person has filled out a form that is being vetted by whatever level of classification that they need to get by the appropriate law enforcement agencies or HR entities.  But I can’t prevent somebody from fully disclosing everything on their taxes or filling out a form.  What I can tell you is that -- and if there is an instance brought to our attention where someone has misled it, either they will be referred to the appropriate law enforcement agency or dismissed, or appropriate action will be taken.
But yes, there is no tolerance for that.
Q    And then very quickly, in regards to Devin Nunes and the fact that he’s going to come today and the comments that you began the briefing by telling us -- on March 4th, the President tweeted:  “How low has President Obama gone to tapp my phones during the very sacred election process.  This is Nixon/Watergate.  Bad (or sick) guy!”  Does the President stand by his statement that President Obama is a “bad (or sick) guy”?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President’s tweets stand for themselves.
Q    So he thinks he’s a “bad (or sick) guy.”
MR. SPICER:  I’m going to answer the question --
Q    Okay, but you said it stood for itself, so I was asking.  
MR. SPICER:  I know.  I think the President’s tweets speak for themselves.  As for the rest of the tweets, let’s see, as we’ve mentioned before, how this process evolves and what information we can further gather up.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  On the executive order on energy independence, that’s been delayed for several weeks now.  Can you --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, why would it be delayed?  We never announced them.
Q    Your office said that it was going to be released several weeks ago.  It wasn’t.  And then there were reports consequently that said it would be released, and it hasn’t been.  So can you give us --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- with all due respect, I don’t believe I ever announced that that was scheduled to come out.
Q    Okay.  Can you tell us when it will be released?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    And also, in it, it addresses the Clean Power Plan, which is the Obama-era climate change regulation.  And there is apparently no replacement opportunity in that executive order.
MR. SPICER:  Can I just -- I’m going to cut you off here.  We’ve discussed executive orders in the past.  I’ve told before -- until they’re ready to be announced, I don’t comment on the scheduling or the --
Q    This is a policy question --
MR. SPICER:  I know it is, but you’re asking me the contents of it.  It’s not a policy question.
Q    No, no, I just haven’t been able to finish my question.
MR. SPICER:  Okay.
Q    Thank you.  So apparently there’s no replacement for it.  That is the answer to a Supreme Court ruling in 2007.  Does the administration feel that it is legally bound to regulate greenhouse gases?
MR. SPICER:  Let’s wait and see what the executive order says or doesn’t say.  I don’t want to get into --
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. SPICER:  I understand the question.  I’m not getting ahead of this at this point.
Q    Sean, will President Trump hold a news conference on the attack?  And also, on his upcoming travel, do you have any guidance on other rallies that he may have?  Because that’s where he sends his message out to the American people, including social media.
MR. SPICER:  He sends his message out in a lot of ways.  If there are rallies, then I would refer you to the campaign website to get updates there.  As for future press conferences, stay tuned on when the next one is going to be.
Q    Sean, when you learned that the members of the President’s team may have been in contact with someone who the intelligence community and a federal judge has deemed to be a little bit dodgy, does that give you any pause at all?
MR. SPICER:  Who are you referring to?
Q    The people who are subject to the FISA order.
MR. SPICER:  I’m sorry, can you rephrase the question?
Q    It’s a reference to Nunes.  Members of the President’s team, whether it’s the transition or the campaign, are said to have been in contact -- being picked up by when they were in contact with someone who was the subject of a FISA order.  Does that give you any pause at all given the things that you haven’t known before about Manafort and Flynn, et cetera?
MR. SPICER:  Not until we know further details.  I think to get ahead of what we know -- until we know what the chairman is going to brief him on, for me to suggest what he is going to reveal to him about whom and when and how would be inappropriate, at this point, to comment on.
I’m going to go to Elizabeth Crisp out of Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Q    Hi, Sean, thanks.  Last year, Louisiana suffered one of the worst flooding disasters in our nation’s history.  Today, thousands of people remain displaced, and communities are struggling to rebuild.  With support from the Obama administration, the state received about $1.6 billion in flood assistance through the CDBG program.  The state is seeking $2 billion more in federal aid, and our governor has asked for President Trump’s support.
So my question is twofold.  What is the Trump administration’s position exactly on the federal government’s role in long-term disaster recovery efforts?  And also, can Louisiana count on this administration’s support for additional flood recovery assistance?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Elizabeth.  I believe the process works such that the governor makes a request to FEMA; FEMA then puts it through the process.  I’m not aware of what the request is or where it stands in the process, and I would refer you back to FEMA on that.
Q    This is actually -- this is aid separate from FEMA.  It’s the long-term part to this.  
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  So I know that the budget that was just presented allows for substantial funding for humanitarian assistance, including disaster refugee program funding in priority areas.  I think at this point the budget process has just kicked off, and we will now begin the process of working with Congress on -- them draft a budget, and talk about our priorities and where they go forward.  
The President will have a full budget out in May, and so that will be an appropriate time to do that.  But I would refer you back to the governor at this point, and figure out where that stands in the process.
Cecilia.
Q    Can you say today, with certainty, that Paul Manafort never tried to pressure or encourage the campaign to take on a more pro-Russia position on any issues?
MR. SPICER:  Not that I’m aware of.  I can’t -- but there’s nothing that suggests that that was the case.
Q    And on Nunes, from what you know about what he has said so far, is the White House viewing this, in any way, as vindication of the President’s wiretapping tweets?
MR. SPICER:  I would refer you to his comment specifically.  Until we know what he is going to brief the President on, I don’t want to have to get ahead of this.  I think, obviously, the suggestion that he made that people were what they call “unmasked,” meaning that an American citizen who is caught up in a surveillance has, by rule of law, has their name protected; the idea that individuals’ names were unmasked and let known suggests -- raises serious questions:  Why was that name unmasked?  What was the intention of doing that?  
There’s a lot of questions that I think his statement raises, and I hope that we can continue to get to the bottom of.  But right now, we just don’t -- we’re not there yet.  I think that there are a series of questions that need to get answered as to what happened, why it happened, and hopefully we will be able to share more with you going forward.
Todd.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  On the border wall, the President’s budget blueprint calls for a couple of dozen lawyers who are going to be dedicated to acquiring land.  And I think people are wondering just how aggressive the eminent domain effort is going to be, and how that squares with respect for private property rights.
MR. SPICER:  As I recall, during the Bush administration similar efforts were undertaken to secure the appropriate property that would be where a fence or a wall, in this case, would be.  So this is nothing new.  This is the government doing what it has to do to protect its border.  I think there’s nobody in America, and I daresay the world, that didn’t believe that the President was committed to building a wall.  And I think that we’re going to take the steps necessary to fulfill that promise, to make sure that we have to.
So I know that the steps are starting to be taken both in terms of the funding and the administrative steps, to see the President’s vision fulfilled on this pledge that he made to the American people.  And we’ll go from there.
Q    Is there any update on how the wall will be financed?
MR. SPICER:  I think both the 2017 supplemental has some initial funding in it.  The 2018 budget does, and has two --
Q    But that's general.  I’m talking about where the money will come from.
MR. SPICER:  Right.  And I think that we’re going to continue to do it.  Right now, the initial funding that was put in place will allow it to begin.  The President has been very clear that using existing resources we’d go forward.  There would be continuing discussions about the financing of the wall, both in terms of how we will pay for it and who will be the source of that payment.
Q    Has he given up on Mexico paying for it?
MR. SPICER:  No, not at all.
Thank you guys, very much.  I’ll see you tomorrow.  We’ll try to have updates on the subjects that are currently pending.  Thank you.
END 
Daily Press Briefing by the Press Secretary -- #27
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
1:38 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon, everybody.  I want to start by acknowledging, as the President did a little while ago, that a great American, Kurt Cochran, was killed in the terror attack in London yesterday.
Our prayers are with his family and friends.  We’re aware of reports that another American citizen was injured, as well as the potential as this story continues to develop -- we stand ready to provide consular assistance, but considering some privacy concerns, I'm not going to further discuss the current state of any of those individuals at this time.
As I said yesterday, the President spoke with UK Prime Minister May to offer his condolences and pledge the full cooperation and support of the United States government in responding to this attack and bringing those responsible to justice.
Now, a little bit on today’s schedule.  This morning, after receiving his daily intelligence briefing, the President met with over 30 members of the House Freedom Caucus to discuss building momentum towards replacing and repealing Obamacare with the American Health Care Act.  
The members of the Freedom Caucus thanked the President for engaging with them throughout their negotiations, and the President, likewise, thanked the group for their willingness to work closely with the White House and their colleagues to craft the strongest possible bill.  The group agreed that their ultimate goal is to implement a system that will drive down costs and increase access to healthcare for millions of Americans, and this meeting was, I think, a very positive step towards achieving that goal.
This was just the latest in a series of discussions, in-person and on the phone, that the President, the Vice President and his team have had, holding with Republican House members on the American Health Care Act.  This afternoon, we expect the President to continue those meetings with members of the Tuesday Group from the House, coming up here later today.
Since the law was introduced, the legislative affairs team has been in constant contact with members the American people will be counting on to fulfill their promise of repealing and replacing Obamacare by supporting this bill later tonight.
In the past few days, the President has been on the phone with scores of Republican members, in addition to the in-persons meetings you’ve seen with the Republican Study Committee, the House Freedom Caucus and the Tuesday Group.  This bill has truly been a collaborative effort from the beginning.  Through an open and deliberative process, the President and his team have helped to negotiate a very, very strong bill.  He was on the phone last night well into the 11 o’clock hour with members on an individual basis, discussing their support for the bill.
The amendments that have been incorporated add important aspects to the bill, like removing costly “essential health benefit” insurance regulations; repealing Obamacare taxes immediately, starting in 2017; reforming Medicaid by allowing states to accept funding as a block grant to implement able-bodied work requirements; and blocking states from receiving enhanced Federal Medical Assistance Percentages if they expanded during the transition.
We’ve already seen the results, with many members coming out and saying they’re going to be a “yes” tonight.  As I’ve noted before, today is actually the 7th -- and we hope, the last -- anniversary of the day that President Obama signed Obamacare. 
The President is looking forward to seeing Republicans fulfill the pledge tonight that they’ve been making to their constituents for years that, with a Republican in the White House and with them in Congress, they would once and for all see the end of Obamacare.
The President -- I assume that President Obama must be feeling this time is up for his signature law, since today he came out with a rather lengthy statement about it.  But he can’t change the facts about where it stands.  President Obama stated that Americans received an “upgrade” in insurance.  But the mandates Obamacare placed on insurance forced millions off their insurance and away from their doctor, which broke the promise that they were given.
President Obama attempted to move the goal posts on costs, downplaying the skyrocketing premiums, some in the case of over 100 percent in some places, and unaffordable deductibles. Americans -- he seems to have forgotten that he pushed Obamacare on the promise of reducing costs, not making health care unaffordable. 
President Obama said Obamacare isn’t -- quote -- in a “death spiral.”  But enrollment is nowhere near expectations, and this year it's actually declining.  Insurers are fleeing the exchanges and one in three counties in America only has one insurer.
President Obama may not believe the Obamacare is a “job-killer” but the new law, including its job-killing taxes, mandates and regulations, speaks for itself.  With the passage of the American Health Care Act, we will begin the process of rolling back Obamacare’s many disastrous policies.
And, of course, it's not just a big day on the House side.  Over on the Senate, we begin the final and fourth day of Judge Gorsuch’s Senate Judiciary hearings.  Earlier today, Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer announced that Senate Democrats would be mounting a filibuster against his nomination. 
From day one, we’ve said that the President made an inspired choice with the nomination of Judge Gorsuch.  The American Bar Association has given them their highest rating of “well qualified.”  This week, though, through all four days, he has showcased his sterling credentials and a brilliant legal mind.  
We find Senator Schumer’s announcement truly disappointing, because it breaks with the tradition of how the Senate has handled Supreme Court confirmation votes in modern time -- and represents the type of partisanship that Americans have grown tired of.
In the last half-century, only three Supreme Court justices have ever faced a filibuster.  The most recent -- Justice Alito -- was opposed by then-Senator Obama who voted to uphold his filibuster, and later admitted that his vote was a politically motivated act that he regretted.  In fact, Senate Republicans didn’t filibuster his Supreme Court nominees, Kagan and Sotomayor.
We call on Senator Schumer to follow Democrats to abandon this attempt to block Judge Gorsuch from receiving a fair up or down vote that he and the American people have voted for.
Back to the rest of the President’s schedule.  This afternoon, the President, as I mentioned, will meet with members of the Tuesday Group.  He had lunch with Secretary of the Treasury Mnuchin and Nelson Peltz.
At 3 o’clock today we hope you’ll come out and join the President to welcome the truck drivers and truck company CEOs who he will be meeting with on the American Health Care Act as they arrive to the White House alongside two rather large big-rigs.  One in every 16 Americans work for the trucking industry.  It’s the backbone of our country’s domestic freight transportation and it moves over 70 percent of domestic freight tonnage.
But the trucking industry has suffered greatly under Obamacare.  Many truckers were forced to buy healthcare plans that weren’t necessarily right for them on the exchanges.  Like millions of Americans across the country, they saw their premiums rise and their options plummet.  And trucking companies, classified as large employers under the law, are mandated to provide insurance that we already know doesn’t work.
Instead of imposing senseless restrictions from Washington, the President’s three-pronged healthcare reform plan will lower premiums and increase choice by increasing competition.  The President looks forward to discussing how these policies, combined with forthcoming tax, regulatory and trade reforms, will provide much needed relief for the trucking industry.
Also today, the Vice President met with President Hernandez of Honduras.  A readout on that meeting is available from the Vice President’s office.
And a few notes before I get to your questions.  As the President noted during his first Cabinet meeting earlier this month, while many of his spectacularly qualified choices to lead his departments and agencies are already in place and taking action to fulfill the President’s ambitious agenda, there are still some important positions that have not been filled, in large part to to Senate Democrats’ obstruction.  I wanted to give you a quick update on still some of the outstanding confirmations.
Secretary of Labor-designate Alex Acosta had a very successful hearing yesterday, and we expect markup next week.
Secretary of Agriculture-designate, former governor Sonny Perdue is currently appearing before the Senate Ag Committee.  We expect Governor Perdue to continue to show why he’s the best choice to lead the USDA, and hopefully his markup to be scheduled in the coming days.
We also announced earlier this afternoon that Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark will be visiting the White House on March 30th.  We’ll have further details on the visit in the upcoming days.
Tomorrow, the President will hose Medal of Honor recipients and their guests in celebration of Medal of Honor Day, which falls on Saturday of this year.  We'll have some more details on that event coming forward.
The President intends to be here this weekend, so as we have updates on the President’s weekend plans we will let you know as well.  I'll also note that we've got -- coming up on a deadline related to the Keystone pipeline.  We'll have an update on that for you tomorrow.
And finally, I'm proud to announce that on April 19th, the anniversary of the Battles of Lexington and Concord, the New England Patriots will be visiting the White House to celebrate their latest -- and what will probably be a continuation of many more to come -- Super Bowl win. 
And with that, I will take your questions.
Jeff Mason.
Q    Sean --
Q    This is a Patriot question.  (Laughter.)  
Q    No, it's not.  (Laughter.)  
MR. SPICER:  Do you know anything about Tom Brady’s jersey?  Is this --
Q    I've got nothing on that.  But I have a healthcare question for you.  First, do you expect there to be a vote tonight?
MR. SPICER:  That's what I understand the House has scheduled, yes.  
Q    Any chance that that's going to be pushed back?
MR. SPICER:  That would be obviously up to Speaker Ryan and Leader McCarthy, but I have been -- nothing leads me to believe that that's the case.
Q    Is the President concerned at all that as he draws support for the bill from the Freedom Caucus that he may lose support from more moderate groups of the House?
MR. SPICER:  He’s meeting with members of the Tuesday Group today.  Obviously this is something that he understands -- there’s a little bit of a balancing act that goes on as you try to get 216 in this case.  But I think we continue to make progress every day.  We walked out with more members in support of the American Health Care Act today than we started the day with, and I continue to see that number climb hour by hour.  And I anticipate that we will get there.
Blake.
Q    Sean, Patrick McHenry said “we have an offer that” -- speaking of the House Freedom Caucus -- “can accept it or reject it.”  Is that the way that you see it at this moment?  Are you just waiting on the House Freedom Caucus to come to your side?  Are you at their whims at this point?  What’s their status as far as you know?
MR. SPICER:  I think there are some members who, in the meeting, stood up and told the President, I’m with you now.  And I think member by member, that’s how they’re going to vote.  I think we’ve continued to see that number rise.  And the same thing with the Tuesday Group.  There are members that had not been with us that are expressing their willingness to want to be part of this.
The President went over several commitments and changes that had been made to assuage different folks that have continued to evolve, and I think that we continue to see the number rise.  But I think that we continue to see the number go up not down, and that’s a very positive sign.  
Q    Do you know how many came across and what it was that brought them across in that meeting?
MR. SPICER:  It depends.  Again, I don’t think there’s any singular issue in a lot of cases.  There’s a lot -- I think we talked a little bit about sections of the bill that there was an issue with.  And so I think there’s a couple areas that there is some common ground on.  But there was over 30 members there today, and some of them had specific aspects that they wanted to see improved, and some of them, frankly, came to say, hey, thank you, I think that what you guys have done already has been an improvement.  
Q    With them is it essential health benefits?  Is that their main sticking point as far as you know?
MR. SPICER:  In a lot of cases -- there were some members that that was their number-one thing.  But, again, it wasn’t universal across the board.  But, again, I think some of the measures that have been taken along the way have really -- and again, there’s also, beyond that, there’s a lot of discussion about phase two and phase three, and I think the President and the Vice President both committed to continuing working and improving and making commitments on the totality and the comprehensive nature of how we’re going to do this.
For a lot of these guys it really comes down to premium increases.  They’re very concerned about what they’re seeing their constituents face.  And I think the President and the Vice President, Secretary Price, Director Mulvaney, Reince Priebus, the chief of staff, the legislative affairs team -- we’re all continuing to work with them to talk about certain measures that have been put in place to drive down cost.  
And I think when you realize what we continue to talk about, that costs are too high, premiums are spiking, deductibles are going up, choices are going down -- these are real concerns for constituents of these members.  And I think that as they see an overall and total commitment of this, it’s making them feel a lot better about not just this bill, but phases two and three.
Matt.
Q    Two questions, both on healthcare.  First one -- is the President open to removing protections for preexisting conditions from the bill?
MR. SPICER:  I think that’s been something that he’s been very clear needs to stay in there.
Q    Okay.  Secondly, about this essential benefits protection.  Obviously among those is maternity leave.  So how would removing that jive with the President’s promise during the campaign to expand maternity leave?  Obviously this would take it out and insurers would no longer have to provide that.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, and again, I don’t want to get into a benefit-by-benefit discussion here, but I think that there’s a lot of concerns, as I just said to Blake, that part of the reason that premiums have spiked out of control is because under Obamacare there were these mandated services that had to be included.  And what happened was is that older men, older women who had gone past maternity age were buying benefits that weren’t necessary for them.  People who were at the younger end of the age scale were buying end-of-life benefits.
And I think this goes back to the nut of this discussion, Matt, which is we have now gone down to a system where in one-third of all counties there’s one choice, and it’s this potpourri of mandated benefits that everyone has to have.  We’ve lost consumer choice.  And so people are paying for benefits that neither they, their spouse, their family needs, which is driving up costs for everybody.
And so part of it isn’t about necessarily a benefit.  It’s about a series of benefits being mandated for everybody.  And so what has happened is that the costs of healthcare for every individual has gone up and the choice has gone down.  And I think there is a philosophical discussion that is going on about what we can do to make sure that people have actual coverage -- something that we’ve talked about before -- but doing so in a way that doesn’t drive up the cost for everybody.
Q    So one follow-up on that then.  Is the President concerned that without having those essential benefits in there, he’ll have a situation where women are just de factor paying higher for health insurance?  Obviously they’d be paying for maternity leave.
MR. SPICER:  No, you could have a family plan.  In other words, the point is, is that it’s not -- again, you’re picking one benefit and trying to extrapolate it.  It’s also saying should young people have to pay for end-of-life care. 
The idea is to instill choice back into the market so that it’s not just about one particular benefit, it’s allowing people to tailor a plan and a cost point that’s good for them or their family or them and their spouse.  But it’s not just about one particular benefit, it’s about looking at this and figuring out what are the cost drivers and how do we give people the choice that they need.
Sara.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  The White House and House leadership initially defended the way this bill was written by saying it needed to be structured a certain way and exclude certain things to be able to proceed through the Senate through budget reconciliation.  So what’s changed to put now these pretty substantive policy changes on the table?  What’s given the White House and Republicans confidence that now it can survive through that same process in the Senate?
MR. SPICER:  I think there’s a lot of discussion that goes on.  Without getting too into it, the issue at hand is the Byrd Rule and whether or not it affects the budgetary -- you can’t have policymaking things that don’t have a budgetary impact.  There are certain things that are being phrased in certain ways and crafted in accordance with the rule.  But there’s a lot of smart people that are very familiar with the rules and are trying to do things in a way to make this bill conform in those ways.
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Two questions for you.  One on the healthcare bill first.  A question about the way this bill is now being modified to basically pick up votes.  On Monday night the amendment included that special carve-out for upstate New York -- had a bunch of good nicknames that I can’t do justice for -- but they also announced these latest (inaudible.)  Is the President concerned that this bill now looks a lot like -- procedurally, it looks a lot like what Obamacare looked like seven years ago that Republicans have spent seven years criticizing the way that bill was brought to the floor, and here they are seven years later on the same day about to do the exact same thing?
MR. SPICER:  No, not at all.  In fact, it's doing exactly what we intended to do.  I mean, the exchange that we had with Matt, it's actually going -- the two goals that it set out to do it's actually doing -- driving costs down, find ways to lower premiums, keep deductibles within reason, or at least giving people the option to choose a plan that fits their budget, and then, secondly, is doing things that instill competition, choice.
So the things that are being done actually achieve the goals that have been set forth.  
Q    Sean, just one for you on a different question.  Yesterday, Secretary Mattis and Chairman Dunford testified on Capitol Hill that they were willing to, before Congress, have a public debate around a new AUMF.  Is that something that -- traditionally, those have started in the executive branch.  Is the White House willing to put one forward and willing to begin that round of discussions?
MR. SPICER:  I'd refer you back to Secretary Mattis.  I think that that is one that's the Department of Defense is --
Q    So is that statement operative for the White House, that the White House now is calling --
MR. SPICER:  No, I think that that was brought up in the context of a conversation that he is willing to have with respect to overseas contingencies that are existing right now in the battle, especially with respect to ISIS, and the current tools that we have to combat them.  But I think that was a discussion about whether or not we should have a discussion on authorized use of force or not, and how to have that.
Jim.
Q    Now that Chuck Schumer has announced a definite filibuster of Judge Neil Gorsuch, do you think it's time for the White House to take a stand on eliminating the filibuster for Supreme Court nominees?
MR. SPICER:  I am not going to -- I'll let -- Senator McConnell is a much more apt user and understanding of the Senate rules.  I'm not going to start to tell Senator McConnell what he should be doing from here. 
Q    He's your nominee, and --
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And it's his rules and his chamber that he leads.  So I'm going to let that --
John.
Q    Sean, thank you.  Has anybody from the national security team or the homeland security folks been in touch with their counterparts in London in the last 24 hours or so?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    Can you expound on that at all?
MR. SPICER:  Only to the extent to say that they've been in touch to evaluate, offer assistance.  And again, I'm not going to get into a classified discussion about what we may or may not be discussing.
Q    A supportive effort needless to say.
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Chairman Nunes today refused to definitively rule out that he received the information he announced yesterday on surveillance, that he got that from the White House.  So will you rule out that the White House or anyone in the Trump administration gave Chairman Nunes that information?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know what he actually briefed the President on, but I don’t know why he would come up to brief the President on something that we gave him.
Q    Well, that's why it was confusing to many of us, so I was wondering --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know that that makes sense.  I did not sit in on that briefing.  I'm not -- it just doesn’t -- so I don’t know why he would brief the Speaker and then come down here to brief us on something that we would have briefed him on.  It doesn’t really seem to make a ton of sense.  So I'm not aware of it, but it doesn’t really pass the smell test.
Hallie.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  On healthcare, a couple for you.  Mark Meadows says -- came out of a meeting and said there is no deal. Does the President acknowledge that this bill appears to be in trouble right now?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think that we're going to continue -- I mean, it's not a question of trouble.  There was no deal.  We weren’t asking for a deal.  The President --
Q    You wouldn’t call the essential health benefits package a deal?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think for a lot of members it was.  And I think some of them stood up and said, Mr. President, we're with you.  I think a lot of them said, we're going to go back and think about it.  But there was no -- the meeting didn’t conclude by saying, "do we have a deal?"  That's not why we had it.  I think for some members this has been --
Q    No final offer before it is --
MR. SPICER:  No, I think this was a discussion that the President continues to have.  I think we have been very, very pleased with the direction it's going in and the number of members who have expressed their support for it.  We'll continue that discussion with the Tuesday Group.  But the number is growing, the number of members who have shared concerns, and I think that we have been very responsive, as well as Speaker Ryan, to the concerns and ideas that members have expressed from across the spectrum.
Q    Two quick clarifications.  You said that there's only plan A.  At this point, is there an acknowledgement that perhaps there does need to be a plan B if this vote doesn’t happen tonight?
MR. SPICER:  No.  Plan A.  
Q    Okay, then the next follow-up is just, has the President asked Speaker Ryan to delay this vote while he works with some of these members to try to convince them to come on board.
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry, what's that?
Q    Did the President asked Speaker Ryan --
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    -- to delay the vote?
MR. SPICER:  Steven.
Q    I was going to offer you the opportunity to respond to what Leader Pelosi said today.  She said that it's a "rookie mistake” to set a date for a bill before there's consensus from the Republican caucus.  What's your response to that?
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  I appreciate that.  I think we have a pretty strong record on the Republican side of getting bills passed, getting things done.  And so -- I know that they have a pretty strong record of passing things and telling people that they can read the bill afterwards.  I think we have done this the right way, and I think -- we know that we've done it with the support that voters told members and the President that they wanted.  
Jonathan.
Q    And related, if I might.  
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, of course.  
Q    There are some former White House lawyers who served in the prior administration who say that by tweeting from his official POTUS account this morning a video that was put out on official social media channels, that the President and the White House have violated the anti-lobbying law because they're using money that was appropriated by Congress.  Is that a concern you guys appreciate?  Is that something that's been talked about here?
MR. SPICER:  It is not.  The President -- that is not applicable to the President, no.  So there is no -- I believe you're referring to 18 U.S. Code 1913, if I'm correct.  (Laughter.)  I think we're pretty good on it.  
Jonathan.  
Q    Thanks, Sean.  The President wrote a book called "The Art of the Deal."  He's considered the ultimate closer when it comes to negotiations.  If this deal falls through, if this bill does not pass, would he accept the blame for its failure?  And if not, who would?
MR. SPICER:  Let's get to the vote tonight.  I'm not going to start -- I think the President has done a phenomenal job, there's no question.  And I think when you look at the effort that he's put in, the number of meetings that he's had, and the changes that have been made to the bill, there’s no question how hard the President and his team, the Vice President have worked to get this done.  And it's in response -- at the end of the day we can’t force somebody to vote, but I think, as I mentioned to Hallie and several other folks, I like the direction that this thing is going.  I think that we continue to see support go with us.
We’re not seeing people fall off, we’re seeing people come on board.  That’s a great trajectory to have, and so I like where we’re headed.
Q    Two very quick clarifications on previous answers and then I have a third question.  I think the issue was not what the President had done but what White House staffers were doing with their official Twitter accounts.  So while the law does not apply to the President it was a question about White House staff.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, so you want me to answer that one?
Q    Sure.
MR. SPICER:  Let me read for you from 18 U.S. Code 1913.  “The Department of Justice consistently has construed that the Anti-Lobbying Act as limiting the lobbying activities personally undertaken by the President, his aides and assistants with the Executive Office of the President, the Vice President, Cabinet members within their areas of responsibilities, and others confirmed officials appointed by the President responsibility.”  
So there’s clearly a carve-out for that.  Next.
Q    When you were talking about the Byrd Rule earlier, can we read from your answer that Vice President Pence does not at any point intend to overrule the Senate parliamentarian?
MR. SPICER:  It’s not a question of overrule.  You don’t overrule.  The Senate parliamentarian makes interpretations.  It’s up to the presiding officer.
Q    -- right?
MR. SPICER:  I do, but I also understand how the Senate works.  And the presiding officer determines -- the Senate parliamentarian has asked for guidance.
Q    Sure, and if the guidance from the Senate parliamentarian is that something would violate the Byrd Rule, would Vice President Pence --
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to answer hypotheticals about what he may do, not on this bill or any other.  
Q    Just finally, CNN reported yesterday that U.S. officials believe that -- are investigating that associates of President Trump communicated with suspected Russian operatives to coordinate the release of information damaging to Hillary Clinton’s campaign.  I’m wondering if you can respond to that or say definitely that they did not do so.
MR. SPICER:  So let’s actually look at what CNN reported.  They reported that anonymous U.S. officials have told them that information indicates that association of the campaign and suspected operatives coordinated, which they admit is not conclusive of anything, is bordering on collusion.  The last line of the thing said, “The FBI cannot yet prove that collusion took place.”
I think there’s probably more evidence that CNN colluded with the Clinton campaign to give her debate questions than the Trump campaign gave any kind of collusion.  So I think when it comes down to that reporting, it is filled with a bunch of subjective terms about this person may have done this, possibly could have done that.  And at the end of the story, if you wade to the very bottom it says, “The FBI cannot yet prove that collusion took place.”
So I’ve addressed this type of reporting in the past, and this fits right in.
John.
Q    Without getting too deep in the weeds on exactly what this strategy is in the Senate to get this bill through the Byrd Rule, is the President confident that the strategy that’s being developed in the Senate will result in a bill that can pass muster?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.  
Q    And the President told us several weeks ago that if it looked like the Democrats were going to filibuster Judge Gorsuch, he would encourage Mitch McConnell to invoke the nuclear option. Has the President’s position on that changed at all?
MR. SPICER:  The President has not spoken to Senator McConnell yet.  I think Senator Schumer, as you know, within the last hour or so came out with his position.  I’m sure that after we get through tonight the President will have some kind of conversation with Senator McConnell and discuss Senate strategy. We’re not there yet.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Following up on Jordan’s question and then I have a follow-up on Hallie’s question.  How did Chairman Nunes end up at the White House yesterday?  This morning he said he invited himself here, but that’s sort of an uncommon way to end up here.  Can you take us through sort of the tick-tock of what happened?
MR. SPICER:  No.  I don’t know how he got here.  I assume in a car.  (Laughter.)  But I also don’t track him.  I don’t keep his schedule either.
Q    You know who he spoke with at the White House?
MR. SPICER:  No, I don’t.  He literally gave a press conference as we were starting and saying I’m going to go down to the White House after we brief the press.
Q    Was this the first time that the White House was made aware of the surveillance that he brought to the President yesterday?
MR. SPICER:  I believe that the information that he shared with the President was new.
Q    And then the follow-up on healthcare.  Is there any sort of plan if the bill does not pass tonight?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    What is the plan B?
MR. SPICER:  No, it’s going to pass.  So that’s it.  
Kaitlan.
Q    Now that you’ve been briefed -- I know yesterday you hadn’t been on everything had just happened -- can you say if the information that Nunes had is the same information that the President said he had that would be revealed this week?
MR. SPICER:  We’re not going to -- my understanding, because I was not briefed on the contents of that, was that he spoke generally about what he had seen in these reports that he had been made privy to, but that there was further details he wanted the President to know what he had seen and that it wasn’t related to Russia.  But he’s continuing, as, again -- all of his public comments are that he is going to continue to pursue this and that he’ll have further updates later.  But I’m not aware of the specific nature of it.  
Cecilia.
Q    Wait, one more question.  What will the President’s reaction be to Republicans who vote against the healthcare bill tonight?  And are they being encouraged the vote their conscience?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think I’ve addressed this before, but I think the President has made very clear that Republicans in particular have made a commitment to constituents and to the American people that if given the opportunity to have a Republican President, a Republican Senate and a Republican House, that they would enact a repeal-and-replace and put into it a patient-centered healthcare.
He believes, as he mentioned during --when he met with the House conference, as he mentioned with the members of the Freedom Caucus today, and I think in several meetings, that this is something that we’ve talked about.  You’ve taken a bunch of these free votes when it didn’t matter because you didn’t have a Republican President.  And you got to vote for repeal and go back and tell your constituents something like 50 times -- well, this is a live ball now.  And this is for real, and we’re going to do what we pledged to the American people and keep our word.
And he’s made it very clear that part of the reason that he got elected is because he went out and made a series of bold pledges to the American people about what he would do if he were President, and he’s acting on those.  And he’s acting swiftly and boldly with respect to this in particular -- and that he believes that not just him, but that members of the House and the Senate have an obligation to fulfill the promise and the pledge that they made to the American people.  
Cecilia.
Q    Regardless of what happens tonight, will we hear from the President?  Will he come out and make a statement?
MR. SPICER:  I think it’s going to depend on what time the vote is.  So I don’t want to commit -- I’m sure in some way, shape or form we’ll have some kind of comment.
Q    And similar to the question you were asked here, but is the President, no matter what happens, prepared to take responsibility for the outcome of this bill?
MR. SPICER:  In what way?  
Q    Whether it succeeds or fails?  His name is on it.  A lot of people think so.
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that in the sense that we’ve been very clear about this is a priority of ours and we’ve worked with him.  But again, I go back to -- at the end of the day, we can’t make people vote.  We’ve done everything we can to listen to them, to incorporate their thoughts, to incorporate their ideas to make the bill as best we can.  But it’s a balancing act, make no mistake about it, that there’s a full spectrum of folks in the House that have disparate desires.
But I think we can all commit that this is the one vehicle that’s going to repeal something that almost every single Republican that I’m aware of has pledged to do if they were reelected or elected.  And I think that there’s a desire that -- we understand that not every member is going to find this perfect.  That’s what happens when you need to get, in this case, 216 votes.  
But it’s the best bill that takes into consideration all of the concerns and all of the goals and all the values -- and I understand that in a lot of cases, some of it isn’t a question of the policy, it’s a question of the timing and some of the things that people want that are happening in phase three and phase one.
But as we’ve addressed, the Byrd Rule, which is -- to most people, this arcane thing probably even in the House that don’t have to deal with it -- in the Senate that deals with whether or not -- and if there is a -- if it is loaded up with things that are stricken, then it doesn’t serve us any good.  
I think that we have put together a very comprehensive approach to addressing how to actually repeal and how to actually replace.  I think the President walked through with the House Freedom Caucus today several of the administrative acts that Secretary Price would be taking in accordance with the authority that was granted to him by the Obamacare legislation and by some of the actions that Secretary Sebelius took back in 2009.
There’s a lot of concern among members about some of the sequencing on things, and I think that we have continued to not  -- so this isn’t just about policy.  Some of it’s about sequencing and timing.  And I think the President and the Vice President and the rest of the team have done a lot to reassure them on the sequencing and how this thing is going to act.  So that discussion I think has continued to be very productive to reassure members how this thing is going to happen and take place.
Eamon.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  A moment ago you said that there was some members of the House Freedom Caucus in the meeting today who were “no’s” who stood up and said, Mr. President, I’m with you.  Can you tell us how many of those there were and what their names were?
MR. SPICER:  Not yet.  And I’m not trying to be cute about this. I think as we do this -- as we do the whip count, I think as you can imagine, that we’ve got to make sure that we don’t -- that this balancing act -- and you’ve got to now make sure that certain people don’t fall off the end as you pick up certain people.  And so we’re keeping that vote total rather tight right now.  But I feel very buoyed by the direction that we’re headed in.
Q    And can you give us a sense of what specific offer was made?  There’s been reporting that the final offer was put on the table for these guys.  What specific changes did the President offer them today that were new that we haven’t seen before?
MR. SPICER:  It’s not just changes.  As I mentioned to Cecilia, part of this is some of the administrative stuff and making sure that they have reassurances that certain things that Secretary Sebelius enacted when she enrolled the bill -- or, excuse me, enacted the bill that will be acted upon immediately.  
And so there was an enumeration of some of those things and a commitment on some of the other aspects of support that would be given for the phase three bill about buying across state lines, increasing HHS -- HSAs.  There was a lot of talk about that.  And that’s where I think a lot of this comes down to right now, especially among those members.  They feel very good about the changes that have been made in the manager’s amendment and they feel very good.  There is some question about the commitment and changes that might take place in the Senate, and so that -- there was a lot of can we count on this when this happens.  So I just want to -- some of this is working that way.
Goyal.
Q    Thank you very much, Sean.  Two questions please.  One, as far as 68 countries representing against terrorism or against ISIS at the State Department under the leadership of Secretary of State Tillerson -- there was an advisor to the President of Afghanistan coming here speaking at CSIS.  And also, the day before yesterday, at the (inaudible) he was addressing Mr. Rabbani, who is the foreign minister of Afghanistan.  What both were saying or addressing to the audience at these two think tanks that unless we control two countries who are financing and training -- Saudi Arabia is financing in the name of charities, and Pakistan is training.  So what is the presidential message to this group?  
At the same time, there is a Mr. Abdel Said, who is wanted by the U.S., $10 million -- there’s a bounty on him.  And he’s openly spewing hatred against the U.S. and India and Pakistan. So where do we go from here?
MR. SPICER:  So, look, Secretary Tillerson is the meeting of -- have been going through this meeting with 68 of those members that are committed to addressing Syria and ISIS.  I’m not going to get ahead of the internal discussions that Secretary Tillerson is having related to the administration’s review of Syria’s policy in particular.  But I would stay in touch with the State Department on that.  
John.
Q    The second part of my question please.
MR. SPICER:  Okay.
Q    As far as President’s relation with the Indian American community is concerned, that 40 years it was 1976 when a spiritual leader came from -- all the way from India to New York City, and he wanted to have a parade, Festival of India in New York, but they didn’t have any resources or sources, but Mr. Trump that time, Donald Trump, came out and helped the group to go on this festival.  But now, candidate Trump was also among the Indian American community celebrating Diwali in New Jersey -- same group who has been now at the White House this weekend, a peaceful prayer and vigil.  They’re asking the President to come out or meet the Indian American community against hate crimes or somebody from the White House.
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think we’ve discussed the nature of hate crimes in the past and we’ve condemned the act that happened in Kansas earlier this year.  Obviously I’m sure that this is a very important issue for them.  The President is right now focused in particular on getting Obamacare repealed and replaced, the issue in London -- there’s a lot that’s occupying his time. And I’m sure that we will continue to monitor that situation as well.
Mara.
Q    Will he come --
MR. SPICER:  Maybe someday.  We’ll see.
Q    I have a question about essential health benefits.  The President said to Tucker Carlson that he wasn’t going to -- if his people weren’t taken care of, he wasn’t going to sign anything.  And I’m wondering what he says to people who voted for him who relied on the provisions for opioid addiction -- things that were included in those essential health benefits, if they go away.
MR. SPICER:  But -- yeah, I -- respectfully, I think that’s a false choice.  Again, the problem with Obamacare is it took all of these benefits, mandated that they had to be offered, and what happened is it spiked insurance rates, it spiked deductibles, and choices went away.  And the point isn’t making a benefit go away or not.  And that’s why I think it’s, respectfully, a false choice.  It’s actually offering options to people.  It’s literally like any other service or product that we have here in this country where you can buy what you want.  Sometimes it’s at a lower price point because that’s what you can afford.  Sometimes you buy features on a product because you want those features.  Sometimes you determine that you don’t need -- but people should have choice in the healthcare market just the same way that they do in almost every other industry.
I mean, that’s the point.  It’s not about giving or taking, it’s about the point that they are being mandated in a way -- and that’s the point, is that people should buy what they want, and what is appropriate for themselves or their family.  I mean that --
Q    Right now, where do the essential health benefits stand?  That they’re going to be part of this bill, or still --
MR. SPICER:  I think my understanding is they’re part of the House bill.
Q    They’re going to be part of this bill?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.
Alexis.
Q    Sean, just to follow up on Mara’s question.  I think part of the inherent question is, a lot of people buy insurance not knowing what they’re going to need. 
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think if you’re an older man, you can generally say that you’re not going to need maternity care.
Q    That’s possible.  But here is the question Mara was suggesting:  Opioi0d and drug addiction -- you don’t buy your insurance and say, I really need that back-up coverage because I think I’m going to get addicted to painkillers or opioid drugs.  So the question is, is the President confident that the kind of choice he has ambitions for would be offered by insurance companies on their own volition?
MR. SPICER:  I think several plans, I’m sure -- I mean, again, you’re asking -- I think there’s a market for things, but like anything else, I don’t think you buy insurance for anything, Alexis, guessing saying, hey, I assume that if my house burns down, I’m going to need to replace all these things.  You buy insurance -- that’s the whole point of insurance.  And I think when people look at it, they’re going to buy what they may not need.  But they’re going to evaluate it, and that’s the same thing when you look at a retirement plan, or a car insurance, or any else.  You evaluate what your needs are, and then make the decision what’s best for you and your family.
Sarah.
Q    Sean, can you say unequivocally that associates of President Trump did not collude with suspected Russian operatives and coordinate on the release --
MR. SPICER:  So say the first part of it again.
Q    Can you say unequivocally that associates of Donald Trump --
MR. SPICER:  See, I think this is -- with all due -- and this is -- the way that the term "associates" is flown around, I don’t understand what that means.  If you're talking about employees of the campaign, employees of the transition or in the White House, that's one thing.  But the way that this term "associates" gets thrown out -- and again, we talked about this yesterday -- you pull out a gentleman who was employed by someone for five months and talk about a client that he had 10 years ago? No, I can't unequivocally say that nobody ever in his past, who may or not have come in contact with him, sat next to him in a plane, who grew up with him in grade school -- because that's, a lot of times, this --
Q    This gentleman, Paul Manafort, you're referring to was a campaign chairman --
MR. SPICER:  No, I get it.  And you're -- I understand who he is.  Thank you.  I'm well aware of Paul, I read it out yesterday.  But the point that I'm making is, when you use a term like "associate," and you use all of these subjective terms, there's a reason that you're doing it, which is because you don’t have anything concrete.  If you do, come back to me and ask, "does anyone in the White House," "is anyone in the transition." But when you throw out a vague term like that, it's a catch-all. Can you be certain that no one who works for Time Life Turner has ever done anything illegal?  I think that's a pretty broad way of casting a net -- or who has visited the building.  I mean, that's what you're equivocally saying.
Q    And also on the question of anonymous sources.  I mean, you clearly have an issue with the way that they have been used among the intelligence officials.  But people in this White House are often on background, they are often appearing as anonymous sources.  Devin Nunes has used an anonymous source to present his intelligence.  So why is it acceptable in that case but not in this case?
MR. SPICER:  First of all, there's two issues here.  Number one is, what I have a problem with, and specific with the reporting that your networks did yesterday, is it was one subjective term after another.  It was associates that may or may not be there.  One subjective term after another, with no concrete proof that anything happened.  When you use a term like "associates," you don’t even put a time frame around it.  It's a little bit nebulous at best to suggest that somebody over and over again, making a claim the way you do and the narrative continues without any substantiation.  When you're talking about Nunes, there's a reason that someone who's dealing with classified information can't go out into public and reveal certain things, because --
Q    He said the information wasn’t classified.  
MR. SPICER:  No, that's not what he said.  I don’t think he ever said that anything wasn’t classified.  But there are certain things that the methods --
Q    He said he was able to talk about it because it was not classified.  
MR. SPICER:  No, no.  He's able to talk about the subject; he cannot talk about the specifics, would be my suggestion -- that you can't talk about specifics of a case in terms of the sources and methods and the individuals.  Because part of what's happened is a lot of the individuals who have been masked or unmasked are supposed to be classified.  So just because something has gone into the public domain doesn’t make it any less unclassified.  That's the problem.
Q    Sean, the nuclear posture review is commencing with this administration.  Can you assure us that everything is on the table, including a lifting of a moratorium on nuclear weapons testing, and also developing new nuclear warheads?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t have a full readout on that at this point.  I'll either get back to you or have someone from the NSC get back to you.
Katie.
Q    Sean, you keep saying that there's not a plan B for healthcare.  President Trump has repeatedly said that Republicans should just allow Obamacare to collapse because Democrats will own that, and therefore maybe we shouldn’t do anything about it, but it's not fair to the American people to do that.  Is the reason there's not a plan B is because the President's plan is to allow Obamacare to collapse?
MR. SPICER:  No.  The President's plan is to pass the bill tonight, get it on to the Senate, and then sign a bill once it goes through conference.  That's the President's plan, and that's why the President has been fighting for it.  That's why the President has been trying to make it stronger and stronger every day.  
But I think he states a very clear reality, which is, if it doesn’t do this, then it is a false choice to compare what we're doing with Obamacare because Obamacare is collapsing -- the premiums are skyrocketing, the choices are going down, the deductibles are going up.  There is no equivalency.  Something is failing, and we're actually trying to get rid of it to help the American people.  
And the point the President is making is, the politically expedient answer is to do nothing, but I think for the sake of the American people and the needs that they have in terms of healthcare, I think we owe it to them to do the right thing.
Q    So a follow-up question:  Who is the President holding accountable for a split in the Republican Party not being able to get this bill done, the struggle that it's taking to get the bill to the last minute?  Is he holding Republican leadership, Paul Ryan, accountable for bringing a bill to the table without having consensus from the Freedom Caucus?  Or is he holding the Freedom Caucus accountable for opposing it?
MR. SPICER:  I think right now we're not focused on blaming, we're focused on getting it done and winning.
Q    Sean, you've criticized President Obama for the way he sold Obamacare, and there may be some validity to that.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.
Q    But candidate Trump, President-elect Trump, and now President Trump have been selling this legislation as coverage for everybody, lower premiums, lower deductibles, and better healthcare.  Hasn’t he put Republicans on the spot with this legislation by selling it that way?
MR. SPICER:  But it is.  So, yes, thank you for the advertisement, I appreciate it.  I think --
Q    Can it do that?
MR. SPICER:  Of course, it can.  I will do that.  And that's what the point is.  But I think that there has been -- A, I think there is some concern, as I mentioned earlier, about the timing. And I think we have continued to allay a lot of those concerns because of the rule that they are.  And again, one of the things that is tough to explain to a lot -- or not tough to explain, but just the reality, is that if we don’t do it the way that we're going to do it, we need 60 votes.  And we're not going to get 60 votes in the Senate for this bill.  The Democrats are united in stopping any progress being made on this.
And so I think the point that we've had to make over and over again is, I get it.  In a perfect world, if we had 60 votes, we could do this in a very, very different way and have a much more comprehensive legislative strategy, but in the same way that the Democrats use reconciliation, as do we, to undo it.  And the reason that it is a three-pronged, three-phase approach is because of the nature that it has to get dealt with.  
And I think for a lot of folks, many of them are new to the process, many of them want to see it done in a different way.  And I think we are trying to do it in the most responsible way, so that when it gets sent over the Senate, we don’t have to have a huge parliamentary fight about what's “Byrd-able” or not.  
And that's -- while most people don’t want to fully appreciate the nuances of that, it's a reality that we have to face if we actually want to get it done.  And I think that makes a big, big difference. 
Peter.
Q    Sean, yesterday when Chairman Nunes was here, we heard his comments.  Today, behind closed doors, he apologized to the committee for not coming to them before he came to the press.  And then he expressed regret for the way he handled this -- going public and going to the President before speaking to the members of his own committee.  So I guess my question is, why was it appropriate?  Why does the White House believe it was appropriate for Chairman Nunes to come and give this information to the President regarding an investigation about the President's own associates during the campaign?
MR. SPICER:  Well, two things.  One is, it wasn’t -- as has been asked before, to ask me why he did something -- he made a decision, he briefed -- hold on, you're getting there.  I've seen enough of you, Peter.  I know where you were going.  (Laughter.)  
But the reality is, is that he made a decision.  He briefed the press first.  No one had a problem, by the way, in the press corps getting briefed before anybody else.  He went down and he briefed your colleagues before he briefed anybody else.  I don’t hear too much crying about that.  The reality is -- and then he made a statement and said, I'm going to come down to the White House and share this information with the President, as has just been noted.  He didn’t give us a heads-up.  He told us he made an announcement, he said I'm coming down to the White House, asked for time to share this with the President.  
And I think part of the reason, to be clear and to your question, is specifically to say that there's a big difference between any discussion about what's going on in Russia and why this intelligence was picked up.  His comments yesterday were very clear the intelligence and the information that he picked up had nothing to do with Russia.  And I think he felt as though, according to his own words, that he had an obligation to make sure the President knew what he had discovered.  That's it, plain and simple.
Q    So to be clear, though, just because appearances matter on this, doesn’t the White House have a concern that it creates the appearance that there was potentially interference by the President that he was included in conversations about the investigation because it was completed?
MR. SPICER:  My concern, to be perfectly blunt with you, is that it's always -- you seem to have an obsession with the process and not the substance.  At some point, isn’t --
Q    Isn't the President --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, hold on, hold on.
Q    The President is the one who wants the conclusion.  He asked for it.  
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.
Q    So I'm asking, why didn’t he ask for details before it was completed?
MR. SPICER:  Because as Chairman Nunes said -- and again, I'm just going to make it clear -- because he said that he wanted to make it very clear that the discussion and the revelations that he had were not -- did not regard anything to do with Russia, and he wanted the President to understand that.  
But there seems to be this obsession with the process:  how did he get here, when did he go, what was the reaction.  At some point, there should be a concern about the substance.  That's a very serious revelation that he's made about what happened during the 2016 election with respect to our side and some of the things that happened. 
And at some point, I would implore, urge, beg some of you to use some of your investigative skills to look into what actually did happen, why did it happen, what was going on back there, who knew what when.  But I think that there should be a similar concern, as opposed to figuring out whether he took a skateboard or a car here to exactly what happened and why it happened.  And the reality is, is that whether he briefed us first or he briefed the Democratic members -- and that's up to him to decide -- the substance of what he shared should be troubling to everybody.  And that's what I think is the important thing.
Q    To follow on this thought, I want to ask you -- at CPAC, President Trump said, people “shouldn’t be allowed to use sources unless they use someone’s name.”  He said, it does “tremendous disservice.”  This is following up on the conversation you started with Sarah earlier.  So, I guess, the simple question is -- Chairman Nunes came out; he noted sources that he couldn’t create and provide publicly.  So why, when it’s politically advantageous, is that use of sourcing okay, but when it’s politically damaging, it’s not okay?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think there’s a difference -- he came out and briefed people on what he knew at the time, and said he was literally going to get further briefs and would have further updates.  That’s a big difference than reporting and making a serious allegation.  In fact, he was doing quite the opposite.  He was vindicating the President and saying there is something that you need to know about the substance of the allegations that are being made against you.  And while that may or may not be the case, because some of what I’ve seen --
Q    But if he had not been vindicating him, wouldn’t it have been just as important for the President to learn?
MR. SPICER:  Sure.  And I think maybe he would have, and then you probably wouldn’t have any concern with that, would you?
Q    My question is to you.
MR. SPICER:  Margaret.
Q    Following on that, two questions.  You said again, the word “vindicated.”  The President said he felt somewhat vindicated.  Did he feel that having Chairman Nunes come down here helped his own credibility?
MR. SPICER:  I think it’s reassuring to know that what he discussed -- while, again, the Chairman made it very clear that he’s not final in any of his processes, that what he had seen so far gave him grave concern -- or whatever the exact phrase before I get -- but to use the phrase that Chairman Nunes needed to say -- that he said.  That it gave him concern and pause for what he had seen, and wanted the President to be aware of the activity that he had seen that occurred during the transition period.  
I think that’s an important -- so I think, yes, the President did -- it was helpful for the President to know that the investigation, as he had asked for, was starting to bear fruit.  And again, I think the equally important thing to note about yesterday was that part of what Chairman Nunes said was that it had nothing to do with these allegations and narrative about Russia.  And I think that is a very, very important narrative to be clear on.
Q    And are they going to meet again?  And after conversations, since they spoke directly, did the President accept Chairman Nunes’s finding that there was no wiretapping at Trump Tower, which he said yesterday?
MR. SPICER:  Well, one, I don’t think that -- the first one wasn’t planned.  There’s nothing planned for the Chairman to come down again.  But second of all, I think I have and the President has very clearly explained that the tweet wasn’t to be taken literally in the sense of the word “wiretap” -- that he was talking about surveillance in general.  And yes, I think that when -- yes, once what Chairman Nunes said is that there was evidence of surveillance that occurred during the election.  And I think that is important to note.  
Again, I think the obsession is with the process of how he got here, and what time he left, and who he briefed first, as opposed to the substance of this issue.  But I’m not going to -- all I’ll tell you is the public comments that he made to you and your colleagues both here and up on Capitol Hill was that he was very concerned with the surveillance that he had seen and reports of surveillance and individuals who had been masked and unmasked during especially the transition period.  I think that should express concern for a lot of individuals.
Q    Sot the President is confident that Chairman Nunes can continue to lead this investigation, and, in his view, be impartial?
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.
Q    Because there have been some questions about that, including from Republicans.
MR. SPICER:  Yes.  
Thank you guys very much.  Have a great one.
END  
Daily Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer - #28
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 

1:15 P.M. EDT

MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon, everyone.  There’s a lot going on today, so I’m going to keep this on the briefer side.
This morning, the President announced the official approval of the presidential permit for the Keystone XL pipeline.  The last administration spent eight years delaying this enormous investment in American energy independence.  President Trump is moving this project forward in just eight weeks.  And just as he promised, it’s an even better deal for the American people than before he took office.  This project will directly generate an estimated 16,100 jobs, according to the State Department -- all without spending a dime of taxpayer money.  
In many ways, this project represented everything that was wrong with the infrastructure permitting of the United States.  TransCanada spent an incredible amount of resources attempting to comply with government regulations, only to be denied and delayed for political reasons.  But the days of pointless government bureaucracy holding up progress and production have ended.  By simply getting excessive, duplicative regulations out of the way, we can make infrastructure projects more attractive -- a more attractive prospect for private investors, and encourage even more projects like this one.
Immediately following the announcement by TransCanada, the President announced that Charter Communications has committed to investing $25 billion here in the United States and hiring an additional 20,000 American workers over the next four years.
Charter Communications is truly an example of how American leadership can turn a downturn entity into an amazing success.
Five years ago, Charter Communications was a struggling company that had slowly emerged from bankruptcy.  Today, thanks to hard work and great leadership of Chairman and CEO Tom Rutledge, it is the fastest-growing television, Internet, and voice company in the nation.  And, most importantly, as Charter grew, American jobs grew, as they brought back many jobs that had previously been shipped overseas.  Today, Charter is also committed to completely ending its offshore call centers, basing 100 percent of them in the United States.  
Together, the TransCanada and Charter Communications announcement demonstrate the new economic model of what the President called The American Model.  By slashing job-killing regulations and reducing government burdens and lowering taxes, we will make it easier for all businesses to grow right here at home, generating jobs and boosting our economy by getting government out of the way.
Following these big announcements, the President had lunch with Secretary of the Treasury Steve Mnuchin.  He was joined by Speaker Paul Ryan -- I'll get to in a second on that.  Later in the afternoon, the President will host a Greek Independence Day celebration.  And as I mentioned yesterday, at 4 o’clock he will meet with about two dozen Medal of Honor recipients to honor Medal of Honor Day, which is technically tomorrow.  He’s honored to be hosting these great men and women of our Armed Services, the greatest force for peace and justice the world has ever known.
And obviously, later today, the House will be voting on the American Health Care Act.  The current vote is scheduled for 3:30 p.m.  The President has been working the phones and having in-person meetings since the American Health Care Act was introduced.  He’s left everything on the field when it comes to this bill.  The President and congressional Republicans promised the American people that they would repeal and replace this broken system.  
Obamacare’s Washington-driven, one-size-fits-all plan had seven years to prove its case, and look what it’s left us with:
Skyrocketing premiums -- on average, premiums for Obamacare benchmark plans increased 25 percent in 2017.  Unaffordable deductibles -- the two most popular Obamacare health plans have average deductibles equivalent to 10 percent and 6 percent of the median American household income.  With these high deductibles, many people have, technically, insurance, but nothing that they can afford to use.  Fewer choices -- one in five Americans have only one insurer offering Obamacare through exchanges.  And, of course, higher taxes.
Key conservative groups like the Tea Party Express and the American Conservative Union have added themselves to a long list of organizations expressing their support for the American Health Care Act because they know it’s our chance, after the American people have spent years suffering, to finally repeal and replace the nightmare of Obamacare.  The President looks forward to seeing the House Republicans join with these influential voices and vote in favor of the American Health Care Act.  
The President, as I mentioned, had Speaker Ryan come up here and visit with him to update him on the bill.  They are continuing to discuss the way forward on this.  The Speaker is updating him on his efforts.  As I mentioned to you, the President has been working throughout the week on this, calling early -- starting early in the morning and working till late at night, calling with members, visiting members.  By our count, over 120 members have personally had a visit, call, or meeting here at the White House in the past few days.  This is an extraordinary feat.  The President and his team have committed everything they can to making this thing happen.  And the Speaker is going to continue to update him on the way forward.
Finally, a few administrative notes here at the end.  Yesterday, senior-level United States and Israeli delegations concluded four days of intensive talks with a particular focus on concrete, near-term measures to improve the overall climate in order to advance the prospects of a genuine and lasting peace between Israel and Palestine.  
The United States delegation was led by Jason Greenblatt, Special Representative for International Negotiation, and included representatives of the NSC and the Department of State.
A principal focus of the discussion was specific measures that could have a meaningful impact on the economic environment in the West Bank and Gaza, allowing the Palestinians to more fully realize their economic potential.
The two delegations also discussed Israeli settlement construction.  The fact that both governments dedicated such senior delegations for so many days reflects the close cooperation between these countries and the importance that both assign to this vital task.
Last night, the President announced his intention to nominate several key additional people to the administration, including Althea Coat-zee to be Deputy Administrator of the Small Business Administration; William Francis Hagerty IV to be ambassador to Japan; Robert Sumwalt III to be a member of the National Transportation Safety Board.  
And also this morning, of note, the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia upheld the President’s revised executive order protecting the nation from foreign people who seek to do us harm into the United States.  We're pleased with this ruling, which found the plaintiffs have no likelihood of success on the merits of their claims.  As the court correctly notes in its opinion, the President’s order falls well within his legal authority to protect the nation's security.  We’re confident the President's fully lawful and necessary action will ultimately be allowed to move forward through the rest of the system -- court system.
In terms of the schedule for this weekend, the President will spend a working weekend here in Washington, and we'll update you with further details regarding his schedule.
With that, I'll get to your questions.  Steve.
Q    Sean, is it your understanding that you don't have the votes to pass the healthcare legislation?  Is that the message that Speaker Ryan delivered today?  And if so, what lessons do you draw from this process?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the Speaker is currently having a conversation with him to talk about where that vote count stands. He’s working with the members of -- you know the President made a sell.  They had the Tuesday Group here.  There were 17 members here; 16 walked out as a “yes.”  I think we've had a group of members that we've continued to have a conversation with and try to make -- frankly, at this point, it's not a question of negotiating anymore.  It's understanding the greater good that's at hand.  
The President understands this is it.  We had this opportunity to change the trajectory of healthcare to help improve -- put a healthcare system in place and to end the nightmare that Republicans have campaigned on called Obamacare.  I noted yesterday it was the seventh-year anniversary of Obamacare.  We have an opportunity to make sure that was the last one, and the question is, do members realize this opportunity.
There’s no question in my mind at least that the President and the team here have left everything on the field.  He has called every member that had a question or concern, tried to, to the extent possible, take into consideration ideas that would strengthen the bill.  And it's now going to be up to the members of the House to decide whether or not they want to follow through on the promise to that.
But we're going to continue to work with the Speaker and the leadership there to see where the votes are.  We're getting closer and closer, but you need to get to 216.  And they’re starting four hours of debate.  I expect a vote somewhere around 3:30-4 o’clock hour.  We'll see where we go.
Hunter.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  We're hearing that Paul Ryan and Mitch McConnell wanted to do a clean repeal and then replace over time.  In retrospect, would that have been a better approach?  And in general, do you think Paul Ryan has handled this well?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know that that's entirely the case.  I know that this was a joint effort.  This is something that the House determined in terms of the three-pronged approach that we had.  So I don’t know that I necessarily agree with the assessment of how that happened.
Q    And, in general, is the White House happy with how Paul Ryan has handled this?
MR. SPICER:  I think the Speaker has done everything he can. He's worked really closely with the President.  I think at the end of the day -- I said this yesterday -- you can't force people to vote.  But I think we've given them every single reason to fulfill every pledge that they've made, and I think this is the right thing to do.
Maggie.  I don’t want you to live-Tweet this thing. 
Q    Thank you, Sean.  What is the White House's view if this does not pass and there aren’t the votes?  What does this mean going forward for other pieces of the President’s agenda -- tax reform being the big one?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I've said it before, I don’t think you can tie any of these together.  That's just not -- I think there's a huge appetite for tax reform.  And I'm not trying to juxtapose anything to do with today's vote or not.  I think it will be great to see it put forward.  The President has put a lot of time and effort into this, and I think he's made a strong case as to why this has to happen, and I think we've worked with the House.
If we don’t get -- regardless of what happens today -- and I still feel optimistic that the Speaker and the President and the Vice President -- we've got a team that's been up on the Hill most of today -- they're going to continue to try to get every vote they can.  But that doesn’t mean -- whether it's immigration or tax reform, there's still a huge appetite out there.
Q    Just to be clear, I mean, if this fails today, is the President done with healthcare?
MR. SPICER:  So negative.  (Laughter.)  
Q    That's what we're hearing.
MR. SPICER:  That's what you're hearing?  Well, I haven’t heard that yet, so why don’t we continue with a very positive, optimistic Friday.  The sun is coming out.  (Laughter.)  I feel really good.  So we're going to continue to work as late as we can to get the votes.  And as I said, the upside is that we continue to pick up votes, people continue to say that they want to -- the question is, can we get to 2016.
But make no mistake about it, the President made it clear last night -- this is it.  You have an opportunity to do what you've told the American people, the commitment that we as a party have made, but this is your chance to do what we've done.  We've listened, we've incorporated, we've updated in every way possible.  
I don’t think -- when you look at legislative efforts, I think the President has given it his all.  And I think it shocked a lot of people, frankly, how very, very detail-oriented, how personal it was for him -- calling members as early as 6:00 a.m. in the morning and going to 11 o'clock at night the last several nights, sitting down, meeting after meeting with them, coming back and revising it, having his team back and forth.  Everything is out there. 
And I think each of these members needs to make the decision, whether or not they believe that they've -- at some point, you can only do so much, is what I would honestly tell you.  And I think everything that we could possibly do to listen to members, to get their concerns in this piece of legislation, to make it as strong as possible for the American people has been done.
Q    But is the President comfortable then with Obamacare continuing?  And what does he say to his supporters?
MR. SPICER:  No, he's not.  I mean, of course, he's not.
Q    I mean, they voted for him with the promise that he would repeal this.
MR. SPICER:  I mean, I'm not even sure where to start with that.  No, he's not, which is why he's literally put as much effort as he has into repealing this.  But he's made it clear that this is our moment, this is our opportunity to do it, but it is now up to members to make that decision whether or not they want to be part of this effort to repeal Obamacare.  And if they don’t -- and I think for a lot of the -- you saw the President's tweet this morning -- I think for a lot of these members who life is as important as well, this is your opportunity.  But it's ultimately them that have to go down in the floor and cast that vote.  And I think we've been able to cast a bunch of votes over the past couple years when you knew a President wouldn’t sign it. You have a President that's going to sign the bill if you pass it.  And now is that time.
Zeke.
Q    Some months ago at the Republican National Convention, the President said -- “I alone can fix it.”  Throughout the entire campaign, his message to his voters, the American people, was, he's a businessman, he knows how to get deals done, he knows how to break the gridlock in Washington, he's the "closer" is what you said earlier this week.  If this vote does go down, what does this say about the President?  Is the President humbled by this process?  And will he readjust -- how will he readjust the administration going forward?
MR. SPICER:  Let's not -- like I said to Jill, I'm still optimistic.  I feel like we're continuing to work hard.  But at the end of the day, you can't force somebody to do something.  I think there's nobody that objectively can look at this effort and say the President didn’t do every single thing he possibly could, with his team, to get every vote possible.  And I think that's why I still feel good about this.
But we are where we are, and members have got to make that decision for themselves.  This is the final hour to make that decision.
Blake.
Q    Sean, is it under any consideration to pull the bill at all between now and then?
MR. SPICER:  You guys are so negative.
Q    Well, there's reports out there that --
MR. SPICER:  I understand.  But there are reports out there -- the Speaker and the President are talking now.  The Leader and the Whip are doing their vote counts.  The debate is ongoing.  We're going to continue -- we are proceeding with a 3:30 p.m. vote as scheduled.
John.
Q    Take me through some of the -- if you don’t mind -- the thinking yesterday when the bill was pulled and then the President had made the decision -- or his team, they went to the Hill saying, there's going to be a vote today.  At what point did he make that calculation?  Why did he make that calculation?  Can you bring us through some of that thinking?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I mean, there's a couple of things.  One is, I think we wanted to be as open as possible with the vote.  Having it on the current trajectory last night, it was going into the wee hours of the morning, and I don’t think that that -- for all that we've talked about, that wasn’t the appropriate way to vote.  I think we decided to work with the House and ask that they postpone and make sure that it was done in the light of day.  
But I think that he's had enough discussions.  And it is not about improving the deal anymore.  I think he has taken into consideration every member's thoughts and concerns, and relayed those to the House.  And I think to the extent that this balance of trying to get to 216, in this case, is such that there are some people that come in with ideas and say, if you do that to get your vote, I'm going to give up 26, or to get these three, I'm going give up 12.  And I think we have struck the right balance right now and incorporated it, and it's the strongest possible bill.  But he's going to continue to work as hard as he can until the very end.
Charlie.
Q    How important is a live vote to the White House and to the President to see who's on the side and who's not?
MR. SPICER:  We've seen the whip counts.  Mr. Scalise has done a phenomenal job with Leader McCarthy of -- we know where the vote count stands.  So we don’t need a live vote to tell us where the votes are.  People have been pretty straightforward with where they are and what their outstanding issues are.
Q    The President and the Speaker are meeting right now.  Do you know -- can you tell us anything about the character of that meeting, or what exactly they're looking at going forward?
MR. SPICER:  Well, they're discussing, they're not looking. They're sitting down and talking about where it stands, some of the outstanding issues, and whether they're onesies or twosies or fives -- what are the concerned and outstanding issues of some of the blocs and some of the individuals, and having a discussion on that.
Anita.
Q    If the bill doesn’t pass --   
MR. SPICER:  There's somebody that's going to ask when it passes, and you can --
Q    Okay, well, do you want to have a briefing right after the vote?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    Okay.  (Laughter.)  
MR. SPICER:  All right, score one for you.  (Laughter.)  
Q    If the bill doesn’t pass, does the President still have confidence in the Speaker?
MR. SPICER:  I think he answered that question earlier today.
Q    Well, does he think that he should step down if it doesn’t get a vote?
MR. SPICER:  He answered that question earlier, and he said he did.  So, asked and answered.
Q    And then, logistically today, after the vote, whatever happens, how will we get a response from you all?
MR. SPICER:  Electronically or verbally, but one of the two.  
Peter.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  This is the President's first foray into, let's say, the sausage-making process, so to speak.  Has he reflected at all on the experience?  I mean, how does he feel it differs from, for example, negotiating a real estate deal, a business deal?  Is it more complicated?  Is it trickier?  What's his feeling about this?
MR. SPICER:  I think we'll have plenty of time to reflect on it after we do this, so I know that -- I'll just leave it at that for now.
Kristen.
Q    Thanks.  Without prejudging the outcome of the vote --
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  (Laughter.)  
Q    -- does the President in any way regret pursuing healthcare first, given how complicated it has been?
MR. SPICER:  No.  I think if you think about it legislatively, in order to maximize -- and I know for most people it doesn’t make a ton of sense, but the savings that you achieve through the first reconciliation of healthcare, which we're doing through the 2017 budget process, which still continues, allows us to utilize the savings in that process to maximize additional tax reform measures that will start in the FY2018 reconciliation process.
So while that sounds like a ton of inside-baseball gobbledygook, the reality is, is that in order to maximize tax reform both on the corporate side, to make our businesses more competitive and to give individuals, especially middle-class Americans, more tax relief -- doing this in that way maximizes the amount of savings that you can use for the second reconciliation package, which would be tax reform.  Doing it the first way, you can do -- but again, you're not going to achieve the full potential that you could if you did it the way that is happening now.
But that being said, I mean, it's not a question of -- we all knew how big this was -- it's one-fifth of the economy -- and what it took.  The issue is, is that I think the disparate interests that are there, and some of the process-explaining, if you will -- the understanding -- the way that this is happening, and I think, legislatively, it’s complicated.  And for a lot of folks that just understand, why can’t you do it all in one fell swoop?  What’s the Byrd Rule?  What’s reconciliation?  Why do you have to do it in three phases?  I think, for a lot of people, that is a little bit complicated to understand.  
And it’s not just a question of understanding.  I think one of the other things that the President and the team have found is that there’s a lot of issues where people are wondering, well, if I vote for this how can I guarantee that I get something in phase two -- which is the administrative pieces that Secretary Price would institute.  
And then third is -- well, you know, the legislative things that will take 60 votes, they complete the overall package -- you know, how do I have -- and so there’s a lot of -- the comprehensive nature of this makes it very complicated.  And I think that’s a lot different.  Normally, you have one bill that sails through, and it deals with all of these things, and you can roll it all in.  If someone has an amendment, you add it in.  In this process,  we’re having to have all these one-off discussions about, you know, will the Senate accept this if you put it in; if you put it in, will they -- not only will they accept it, but will the Byrd Rule take place and kick out the whole thing.  That complicates this probably like nothing else.
Q    Understood.  Just to put a fine point on it, though, was it his initial ask to do healthcare first, or did House Speaker Paul Ryan say, I think this is -- 
MR. SPICER:  I think was something that, during the transition, we sat down and gamed out in coordination with the House in terms of what should go first and why.  But again, it’s not a question of just what should go first, it’s a question of if you don’t do it first, do you lose some of the potential in savings that you would achieve through the second reconciliation.
Q    Wouldn’t it have been wiser to try to work with the Freedom Caucus, for example, on something like infrastructure reform to build up some goodwill with that caucus, and then come back to something more complicated?  
MR. SPICER:  No, I think -- look, Kristen, we’ve talked about this since 2010.  Every Republican, with the exception of probably a handful, has campaigned from dog catcher on up that they would do everything they could to repeal and replace Obamacare.  And I think to get in and say, hey, you should have done something else wouldn’t be fair to the American people who have said, okay, I’ll vote for you but I want you to fulfill this pledge.
Q    And just finally, does the buck stop with him on this?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean -- like I said earlier, you can’t force someone to vote a certain way.  I think, in the sense that has he done every single thing, has he pulled out every stop, has he called every member, has he tweaked every tweak, has he done every single thing he can possibly, and used every minute of every day that’s possible to get this thing through, then the answer is yes.  Has the team put everything out there?  Have we left everything on the field?  Absolutely.
But at the end of the day, this isn’t a dictatorship, and we’ve got to expect members to ultimately vote to -- you know, how they will according to what they think.  But I think they’re -- as the President made clear, they’re the ones who have to go back and answer to their constituents why they didn’t fulfill a pledge that they made.
Q    Non-healthcare question for you.  Regarding these documents that Devin Nunes says show incidental intelligence collection of identifying information about people associated with the Trump campaign, can you categorically rule out that Chairman Nunes received or was alerted to these documents from someone at the White House?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not aware of where he got the documents from.  I don’t know.
Q    Can you rule out that it came from the White House?
MR. SPICER:  I can’t -- I don't know where he got them from.  He didn’t state it.  So I don’t have anything for you.  And so I cannot say anything more than I don't know at this point.
Cecilia.
Q    So if the President has done everything he can possibly do, and the Speaker has done everything he can possibly do, the team has put everything on the table, who is to blame right now for this hold-up, in your eyes?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, let’s wait and see how this thing -- I’m not assigning blame.
Q    Well, but you wanted a vote even last night or this morning, so there is a stall.  So from last night to this morning --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, we did want a vote last night, and I think, as I have mentioned, as we got into the evening hours, the idea wasn’t to bury this at 12:00 a.m. or 1:00 a.m. in the morning.
Q    Initially, you were asking for one yesterday, and there was a statement from your press office that asked for one this morning.  
MR. SPICER:  No, no -- and I’m not backing away from that.  We wanted a vote yesterday.  But as the process went on, we realized that that vote would occur in -- probably, actually, into today, in terms of like calendar-wise, and that doing it at 1:00 a.m., 2:00 a.m., 3:00 a.m. in the morning was not something that would be in keeping with what we had promised.
Q   So who is to blame for the stall right now?  Is it the Freedom Caucus?  Is it --
MR. SPICER:  I think it’s not a blame.  Right now, it’s a question of getting all these members together and dealing with all -- I mean, you’ve seen the activity.  You’ve seen the members go back and forth.  Right now, we’re still in that active discussion phase with trying to figure out who we can get on board and whether or not we can move forward.
But this is -- we’re not there yet.
Q    But you put this ultimatum out there.  Is the President, right now, still confident that he can see this bill through -- that you will repeal and replace Obamacare?
MR. SPICER:  The President is confident that we have done every single thing possible, made the case, updated it, added and done everything to listen to the concerns and to do everything that fulfills the promises that we and members have made with the American people. 
John.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Without prejudging the outcome of the vote today, but focusing on your comments and the President’s, saying this would be a vote against life if people vote against it -- 
MR. SPICER:  Right. 
Q    -- several Republican members said they did not want the vote on Planned Parenthood in this particular bill. Congressman John Faso of New York was particularly outspoken.  Did anything come up in the negotiation or from the White House saying they guarantee a separate vote on Planned Parenthood and leave it out of the bill?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not aware of that, John.  I’m not aware that that happened.
Q    The White House -- from your tone and the President’s, the White House wanted the Planned Parenthood vote in?
MR. SPICER:  I’d have to go back and look at -- there’s a lot of discussions that go on.  I honestly can't remember how or when that came up.
Q    The other thing I wanted to ask was that the last two members who announced they were no -- Chris Smith and Frank LoBiondo, Republicans of New Jersey -- both cited the number of Medicaid recipients in their district as their premier reason.  Congressman LoBiondo said in three counties, 30 percent of his constituents were on Medicaid, and he wanted no damage.  Was there anything discussed on Medicaid?  Was it on the table in the negotiations?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I know that that there was a discussion about the expansion of Medicaid and some of the work requirements with respect to able-bodied Americans who are receiving that.  But I would say this, John -- one of the things that -- not member-specific to either of the members from New Jersey -- is that members have to understand that the current system is unsustainable.  So if you vote no today, then what is your alternative, and what do you want?
Because right now there’s a lot of folks that have said they're going to vote no, which is their prerogative, but at the end of the day, the current Obamacare system will collapse on its own.  And so the question that they have to ask themselves or that they are going to be asked by their constituents is, then what is your alternative?  Because right now this is the choice that will save the system.  The other choice is to do nothing, and that will -- that is going to collapse the system.  
Eamon.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  The stock market has been largely looking at this as a proxy for how you're going to do on your tax cut proposal.  Would you be able to say what the lessons learned here are about how this was handled that might apply to the tax cut proposal?
MR. SPICER:  Look, Eamon, I’ve discussed this earlier.  I’m not going to start getting a “lessons learned” while we're in the middle of debate of a current bill.  We'll have plenty of time -- if you want to stop by over the weekend, we can talk about -- (laughter) -- to sit down with you on that.  But again, we're not -- right now we're focused on getting the votes.  The House has a vote scheduled.  That's what our focus is -- not to figure out -- we’ll have plenty of time for that. 
Jen.
Q    Is the President going to just simply wash his hands of this today if this doesn't go his way?
MR. SPICER:  Look, we're not -- the President is going to wash his hands several times, but I don't know -- (laughter). 
Q    The central campaign promise of the President of the United States -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that, and so what -- I get it.  So slow down.  Let’s turn on C-SPAN and all watch this together, and then we can discuss what happened.
Jen.
Q    Treasury Secretary Mnuchin was talking this morning about doing tax reform by the August recess.  Do you think that that's a reasonable timeline?  And why the rush?  Are there any lessons learned from this healthcare debate?
MR. SPICER:  Again, I think tax reform is something that we’ve talked about.  There’s plenty of time.  I think it’s a goal, and I think it’s an ambitious one and I think it’s one that we're going to try to stick to.  But let’s get by today, and then we’ll lay it out. 
But I think tax reform is something that the President is very committed to.  You've seen him very publicly in the last couple of open events talk about how excited he is to move on once this is done to tax reform.  Because he understands both sides of this -- that the business piece of this -- we are so uncompetitive when it comes to our other worldly competitors in terms of our tax rate, and yet when we have these discussions about keeping companies from either shipping jobs overseas or growing -- bringing back jobs to America, the two things that come up over and over again are our tax rate and our regulatory system.  
And I think he understands that on the tax front, we can be a lot more competitive with the rest of the world in growing American jobs here at home and, frankly, expanding manufacturing if we lower that, but also that the American middle class desperately needs and wants a tax break, and I think the more that we can do with that -- so this is something that I think we're going to be continuing to work on, and we’ll have more on that later.
Trey.
Q    Sean, how much credit will the President take for the outcome of this healthcare bill?
MR. SPICER:  I’m going to refer you to like the last eight people.  Let’s see where we go from here.
Q    Quick follow-up?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    Is the White House still as confident as they were earlier in this week, and is the President still as confident as he was earlier in the week that this healthcare bill will pass?
MR. SPICER:  I would suggest to you it’s -- my answer that I said to Kristen is that we are confident that we have done everything, and it is now up to voters.  
The President -- we -- the President called for a vote, and respectfully -- obviously, it’s not up to us, but the reason that he asked Speaker Ryan and Leader McCarthy to call for a vote is we've done everything.  We've done every single thing that -- every meeting, every call, every discussion, every idea has been out there, adjudicated, listened to.  And I think that now is the time for the vote.  And so we're a couple hours away, and let’s see where we go.
Q    -- level of confidence remain?
MR. SPICER:  I think in the sense of what we did, yes.
Peter.
Q    Sean, the President can order every surveillance transcript that mentions himself or his associates in regards to Russia for the investigation that he called for to be brought to his desk at any time.  Has he done that?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    So yesterday you were asked specifically -- you said that the concerns should be less about the process and more about the substance.  I asked because that would be one way to get directly to the substance.  
On the substance, Devin Nunes said initially that he -- there was evidence that “clearly showed that the President-elect and his team were at least monitored.”  Then today he said --, asked if Trump or his associates were monitored or mentioned, he said, we don't know.  We won’t know until we actually receive all the documentation. 
The President said he’s somewhat vindicated.  So given the fact that Devin Nunes doesn't actually know if the President was monitored or whether he was even mentioned, what is he vindicated by?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that there has been an acknowledgement that there are documents out there showing that people were surveilled or monitored to some degree.
Q    They could have exclusively been foreigners, Devin Nunes concedes.
MR. SPICER:  Devin Nunes also made it clear that he’s going to have a hearing later next week with several members of the intelligence community and calling others back.  And so let’s wait and see -- 
Q    Well, what is the President vindicated by?
MR. SPICER:  The President said he felt somewhat vindicated because I think that there is an acknowledgement that he’s -- that as we proceed down this discussion, it continues to show that there was something there, and that despite the constant discussion about the process -- 
Q    But he said we don't -- we won’t know.
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, Peter.  I understand.  I get this is 
-- I understand that.  And he also said that he’s going to have a hearing and he’s going to call the people back, and he’s waiting for the documents.  So let’s wait and let that process evolve.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  A couple questions.  First about Keystone.  What changed?  It seemed like it took forever in covering the Obama administration for this thing to finally get over the finish line.  It never did.  And relatively quickly -- less than 65 days in -- it’s finally made its way over the finish line.  What changed, especially with respect to the State Department’s view of the Keystone XL pipeline?  
And is it your opinion that it would be good to hear from the President -- win, lose, or draw -- after what we learned today vis-à-vis healthcare reform?
MR. SPICER:  So, simply put, on Keystone, it was a priority. I mean, the President came in, he signed an executive order on it.  He had talked about it during the campaign and he made it a priority.  He made it a priority for his team here at the White House to get it done -- not only the jobs but incorporating U.S. steel and -- there was a lot of things.  
But I don’t think it’s any simpler than he made it a priority for him, his team, this administration, the Department of State, and others -- and that’s it.  He recognizes the importance of that to both energy and to jobs and our economy, and simply got it done.  And I’ll leave it up to the President, once we go forward, to see how it goes.
Margaret.
Q    Sean, as a dealmaker, why does the President feel that this take-it-or-leave-it approach is the right one on healthcare?
MR. SPICER:  Because I think he has done -- I mean, at some point you’ve listened to everybody, you’ve gotten all other ideas, you’ve gone back and forth, you have incorporated them, you’ve assuaged them in some way, shape, or form; you’ve updated the bill -- and a lot of times, it’s the same people coming back over and over again.  And you go, okay, I’ve listened to you, I’ve taken your ideas.  At some point, we either have a deal or we don’t.  
And I think that’s where the President finally drew the line and said we’ve been having this discussion, we’ve had the meetings, and we’ve done everything possible to address the concerns and ideas and opinions that people have brought up.  And I mean, I don’t think you can say it any simpler.  I think he has done every single thing possible, and you end up, at some point, finding yourself going around and around and saying, okay, let’s just -- let’s call the vote.
Q    But isn’t there a political cost to a collapse, potentially?
MR. SPICER:  I think that, at some point, there’s a political cost to dragging this out, as well, and saying, let’s just keep letting it go.  And I think that’s where -- you know, we came to a decision that it had gotten as far as it can go.
Kaitlan.
Q    If there’s a collapse, though, isn’t there a cost that the President will, at some point, have to pay for?  If it’s either --
MR. SPICER:  In terms of what?
Q    The collapse that you have been predicting --
MR. SPICER:  No, I think that -- look, remember -- look, this is --
Q    Besides the upcoming election in 2018, I’m talking about economic impact, all the impact on the states -- there will be a cost.
MR. SPICER:  I get it, and I think that we’ll have to look at the landscape.  But at some point -- you know, I think right now Democrats made a decision during this debate that they wanted to stick by Obamacare.  I think, at some point -- the President has talked about this -- that this is going to collapse.  And let’s see where this thing heads, but I think, right now, we have a plan on the table that allows for a solution that will address all of the concerns that, frankly, were initially brought up as far as what the Affordable Care Act was supposed to do.
Kaitlan.
Q    So if you know what the vote counts are right now, and there’s no discussion of pulling the healthcare bill, and it gets closer to 3:30 p.m. and you still don’t have the votes, why vote?   
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to discuss our strategy.  I mean --
Q    But you see what I’m saying, right?
MR. SPICER:  I do.
Q    If you know what the votes are and you know that you don’t have the votes for it to pass, why vote?
MR. SPICER:  I understand your question.  I’m just not going to comment on our strategy.  I think the President and the Speaker are going to have a discussion about where those votes are and what some of the members needs are, and we’ll take it from there.
Athena.
Q    You talked about all the work that the President and his team have put into this -- the early-morning calls, late calls.  The other day, one of the members of Congress who was here to meet with the President -- Congressman McHenry -- called -- said, we’re bringing him to “the closer.”  You embraced that nickname from the podium.  Whatever happens today, do you still feel comfortable calling the President “the closer” when it comes to deal-making on all this?
MR. SPICER:  Look, I think I said to Christian and a couple others, I think he has done everything possible.  There is no one, either on Capitol Hill or any honest observer of what’s happened, that doesn’t recognize the extraordinary feats.  But at some point, as I’ve mentioned, this isn’t a one-on-one negotiation.  This is -- you know, you have to get to 216.
And I don’t -- I think part of this question is to go to some of those “no’s” and ask them, what is the reason and what would you do?  And the probably is, is that, as I’ve mentioned before, there is this balancing act, where to get these two members, you’re giving up 14.  But we’re doing everything possible to get to that 216.  And that -- I don’t -- I think when you actually objectively look at the effort that was undertaken, there is no question that every single thing that has been done has been done to maximize the vote count on this.
Q    And to be very, very clear -- this has been addressed a few times, but I want to get a clearer answer.  You talked a lot about how this is the chance, this is an opportunity for Republicans to make good on campaign promises.  I asked the President a couple days ago, what happens when you keep pushing if this fails today.  And he said, we’ll wait and -- we’ll have to see what happens.  Are you saying right now that there will be no future attempts to comply with that campaign promise if today’s attempt fails?
MR. SPICER:  I can’t say that there’ll never be -- and again, I’m not going to be fatalistic when we’ve got a vote at 3:30 p.m.  I know that the President has made it clear that this is the effort, this was the train that’s leaving the station, and that he expects everyone -- you know, this is our opportunity.  
And he’s got a lot left on the agenda that he wants to get done, whether it’s immigration, taxes, the border wall.  There’s so many other things that he wants to get done that we’re not going to sit around and figure out -- this is the opportunity, this is the time, this is the opportunity for every member who has said that they want to repeal and replace Obamacare to put their vote in the “yes” column.
Q    And last one.  If it does pass today -- you’ve talked a lot about this being done in three phases, today being phase one. Phase two and phase three, one of the problems, I think, is that this is not information that is in score-able form -- the steps that Secretary Price might take, and then what may end up in this final bill.  Is there any attempt being done --
MR. SPICER:  Well, I don’t know yet.  At some point, maybe it can -- I mean --
Q    Can you put the administrative steps that Secretary Price --
MR. SPICER:  I don't know.  That’s --
Q    Is that something that’s being attempted to be done?  Because that’s the kind of information I think members want. 
MR. SPICER:  I think, right now, we’re focused on the vote. But I think that we’ll have either OMB or CBO take a look at not just the other elements, but can you look at it in its totality. I don't know that that’s -- but that’s a good question that I can have the OMB folks address potentially with the CBO folks.
Thank you, guys.  I’m sure we’ll have some additional updates today.  Thank you.
END
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 3/27/2017, #29
James S. Brady Briefing Room

1:34 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  Hi, guys.  Good afternoon.  I hope everyone had a great weekend, seriously.  It's Monday, so I brought a special guest.
First, I'd like to have the Attorney General come up to the podium to make an announcement regarding immigration enforcement with respect to sanctuary cities.  When the Attorney General is done speaking, we'll have time for a couple questions and then I'll continue with the briefing.  So if your question is not germane to sanctuary cities, keep your hand down and we'll get to it after we go through the events of the day.
So, with that, Attorney General Sessions, come on up.
ATTORNEY GENERAL SESSIONS:  Thank you, Sean.  The Department of Justice has a view to enforce our nation's laws, including our immigration laws.  Those laws require us to promptly remove aliens when they are convicted or detained of certain crimes.  The vast majority of American people support this commonsense requirement.  According to one recent poll, 80 percent of Americans believe that cities that arrest illegal immigrants for crimes should be required to turn them over to immigration authorities.  Unfortunately, some states and cities have adopted policies designed to frustrate this enforcement of immigration laws.  This includes refusing to detain known felons on the federal detainer request, or otherwise failing to comply with these laws.
For example, the Department of Homeland Security recently issued a report showing that in a single week, there were more than 200 instances of jurisdictions refusing to honor ICE detainer requests with respect to individuals charged or convicted of a serious crime.  The charges and convictions against these aliens included drug-trafficking, hit-and-run, rape, sex offenses against a child, and even murder.  Such policies cannot continue.  They make our nation less safe by putting dangerous criminals back on the streets.  We all remember the tragic case of Kate Steinle, the 32-year-old woman who was shot and killed two years ago in San Francisco as she walked along a pier with her father.  The shooter, Francisco Sanchez, was an illegal immigrant who had already been deported five times and had seven felony convictions.
Just 11 weeks before the shooting, San Francisco had released Sanchez from its custody, even though Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers had filed a detainer requesting that he be held in custody until immigration authorities could pick him up for removal.  Even worse, Sanchez admitted the only reason he came to San Francisco was because it was a sanctuary city.  
A similar story unfolded just last week, when Ever Valles, an illegal immigrant and a Mexican national was charged with murder and robbery of a man at a light rail station.  Valles was released from a Denver jail in late December, despite the fact that ICE has lodged a detainer for his removal.  
The American people are not happy with these results.  They know that when cities and states refuse to help enforce immigration laws, our nation is less safe.  Failure to deport aliens who are convicted of criminal offenses puts whole communities at risk, especially immigrant communities in the very sanctuary jurisdictions that seek to protect the perpetrators.
DUIs, assaults, burglaries, drug crimes, gang rapes, crimes against children, and murderers -- countless Americans would be alive today and countless loved ones would not be grieving today if these policies of sanctuary cities were ended.  Not only do these policies endanger lives of every American -- just last May, the Department of Justice inspector general found that these policies also violate federal law.  
The President has rightly said, disregard for the law must end.  In his executive order, he stated that it is the policy of the executive branch to ensure that states and cities comply with all federal laws, including all immigration laws. 
Today, I'm urging states and local jurisdictions to comply with these federal laws, including 8 U.S.C. Section 1373.  Moreover, the Department of Justice will require that jurisdictions seeking or applying for Department of Justice grants to certify compliance with 1373 as a condition of receiving those awards.
This policy is entirely consistent with the Department of Justice's Office of Justice Program's guidance that was issued just last summer under the previous administration.  This guidance requires state and local jurisdictions to comply and certify compliance with Section 1373 in order to be eligible for OJP grants.  
It also made clear that failure to remedy violations could result in withholding grants, termination of grants, and disbarment or ineligibility for future grants.  
The Department of Justice will also take all lawful steps to claw back any funds awarded to a jurisdiction that willfully violates 1373.  In the current fiscal year, the Department of Justice's Office of Justice Program and Community Oriented Policing services anticipates awarding more than $4.1 billion in grants.  
I strongly urge our nation's states and cities and counties to consider carefully the harm they are doing to their citizens by refusing to enforce our immigration laws, and to rethink these policies.  Such policies make their cities and states less safe -- public safety, as well as national security, are at stake -- and put them at risk of losing federal dollars. 
The American people want and deserve a lawful system of immigration that keeps us safe, and one that serves the national interest.  This expectation is reasonable, just, and our government has the duty to meet it, and we will meet it.
Thank you.
Q    In Montgomery County, right up the road, there was a rape in Maryland at Rockville High School.  Has anyone from the Department of Justice had any conversations with anyone in Montgomery County or Rockville, as they describe themselves as a sanctuary county and city?  And there's also a boatload of federal government in Montgomery County.
ATTORNEY GENERAL SESSIONS:  Well, you know, Maryland is talking about a state law to make the state a sanctuary state.  The governor is opposed to that, I'm glad to hear.  That would be such a mistake.  I would plead with the people of Maryland to understand that this makes the state of Maryland more at risk for violence and crime.  It is not good policy.  And as a former prosecutor for many years in state and federal law in jurisdictions, I just know the historic relationship different federal agencies have with regard to honoring detainers.  It's just a fundamental principle of law enforcement that if you have a person arrested, and another jurisdiction has a charge, then they file a detainer.  And when you finish with the prisoner, you turn them over to the next jurisdiction for their adjudication.  That is why it should be done --
MR. SPICER:  Major.
Q    Mr. Attorney General, so listening to you carefully, it sounds like you're applying the standards and the policy that the Obama administration put forward on compliance with underlying Justice Department rules.  Are you taking any additional steps?  And have you asked the President to maybe talk about other federal funds that are not necessarily under your control as a way to punish sanctuary cities or states?
ATTORNEY GENERAL SESSIONS:  Well, that's a good question.  What I'm saying today is that essentially the policies of the Obama administration that were issued last July make clear that you should not be receiving certain federal funds if you're not in compliance with 1373.  We believe that grants in the future could be issued that have additional requirements, as every grant that's being issued in America today usually has a requirement that if you qualify for this grant, you have to meet certain requirements.  So we'll be looking at that in the future, and we'll continue to pursue it.  But fundamentally we intend to use all the lawful authority we have to make sure that our state and local officials, who are so important to law enforcement, are in sync with the federal government.
Q    Some officials in cities, for example -- bigger cities -- have said, despite the lack of federal funding, they will continue to be sanctuary cities; that they don’t care that they're losing money, essentially.  What recourse does the Department of Justice have in those cities that look at what you're doing and say, we don’t care, we're going to continue to implement this policy?
ATTORNEY GENERAL SESSIONS:  Well, that's very disheartening, but I hope that the American people and their constituents in their own cities will communicate with them.  And as we continue a dialogue and a discussion, and as we continue to ensure that monies that go for law enforcement only go to cities who are participating in an effective, collegial, cooperative way with the federal government, that that would also send a message.  We have simply got to end this policy.  Thank you all.  
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  You guys ready to continue? 
Q    Yes.
MR. SPICER:  Good.  Before I get into today's schedule, I wanted to read -- I know there's been some interest in the State Department's statement regarding the arrest of hundreds of protestors -- peaceful protestors -- that occurred in Russia.  
The statement that the State Department put out says:
"The United States strongly condemns the detention of hundreds of peaceful protestors throughout Russia on Sunday.  The detention of peaceful protestors, human rights observers, and journalists is an affront to essential democratic values.  We are troubled to hear of the arrest of the opposition leader upon arrival at the demonstration, as well as the police raids on the anti-corruption organization he heads.  The United States will monitor the situation, and we call on the government of Russia to immediately release all peaceful protestors.  The Russian people, like people everywhere, deserve a government that supports an open marketplace of ideas, transparent and accountable governance, equal treatment under the law, and the ability to exercise their rights without fear of retribution."
Now, with respect to events for the day, this morning, after receiving his daily intelligence briefing, the President participated in a roundtable with women small business owners.  The President is hosting a group of women business owners as part of the White House's full calendar of Women’s History Month events.  
At the roundtable this morning, Vice President Pence, SBA Administrator McMahon joined with other senior administration officials to hear from these amazing female entrepreneurs and small business leaders about their firsthand experiences, successes, and challenges.  As the President said, “Empowering and promoting women in business is an absolute priority in the Trump administration because I know how crucial women are as job-creators, role models, and leaders all throughout our communities.  
The women in attendance this morning have incredible stories, including many who have started businesses from scratch with very limited resources, and, through hard work and determination, turned their dreams into reality.  Between them, they provide hundreds of jobs to Americans across the country.  The President is dedicated to continuing to remove the unique barriers that women face in our economy, including access to capital, markets, and networks.  This administration will continue to advocate for policies that support working family, including a national initiative to promote women business leaders and entrepreneurs that his daughter, Ivanka, is helping to lead.
In honor of Women’s History Month, the White House has been hosting events all throughout March.  Just to name a few, the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Systems Administrator Verma held a roundtable with Women in Healthcare, which the President attended.  The First Lady held a Women’s Empowerment lunch on International Women’s Day.  Earlier this month, Second Lady Karen Pence joined women from all five military branches for lunch at Fort Meade, and last week hosted military women at the Vice President’s residence to thank them for their service.  Under President Trump, the American economy is a place for everyone, regardless of their gender, to thrive.  
Following the roundtable, the President had lunch with the Vice President and Secretary of State Tillerson.  And at three o'clock, the President will sign House Joint Resolutions 37, 44, 57, and 58 -- all of which use the powers of the Congressional Review Act to roll back job-killing rules.  Before this administration, only one time in the nation’s history had a President ever signed a bill that used the Congressional Review Act to cancel a federal regulation.  In just his first 66 days as President, he will have signed six resolutions to eliminate unnecessary and burdensome rules.
House Joint Resolution 37 rolls back the so-called “blacklisting” rule, which manufacturers identified during their meeting with the President as one of the most significant threats to growing American businesses and hiring more American workers.  The rule simply made it too easy for trial lawyers to go after American companies and American workers who contract with the federal government.  The President saw that workers, taxpayers, and businesses were the ones who truly suffered under this rule, and he is glad to be signing legislation to eliminate it.
House Joint Resolution 45* [44], 57, and 58 cancel federal power grabs that took decision-making away from the states and local governments who know the unique challenges of their own populations.  The President firmly believes that Washington is not always the solution to these problems, and that these bills return the power to the people by putting more decision-making in the hands of states.
House Joint Resolution 44 removes a Bureau of Land Management rule, known as “Planning 2.0,” that would have centralized federal and land management in Washington, diluting the concerns of local citizens who have a right that is protected by law to be involved in this decision-making process.
H.J. Res. 57 and 58 eliminate the Department of Education regulations which limits states’ flexibility in how they assess the performance of schools and teacher preparation and programs.  Removing these additional layers of bureaucracy will make it easier for parents, teachers and communities, and state leaders to address the needs of their students.
The President will continue to work with Congress and the rest of the federal government until every unnecessary regulation that stands in the way of success for American business and American people is taken off the books.
Additionally, the President spoke with German Chancellor Merkel and Indian Prime Minister Modi earlier today to congratulate them on their parties’ success in recent elections.  We’ll have readouts on those calls a little later for you both.
The President also will announce the establishment of the Office of American Innovation.  The Office of American Innovation will apply the President’s “ahead of schedule and under budget” mentality to a wide number of government operations and service, enhancing the quality of life for all Americans.  The office will have a particular focus on technology and data, hearing back from leaders in the industry.
As some of its first priorities, the office will focus on modernizing the technology of every federal department, identifying transformational infrastructure projects, and reimagining the VA system so that it can better serve our nation’s heroes.  The effort will be led by Assistant to the President and Senior Adviser Jared Kushner. 
Tomorrow, the President will sign an executive order to strengthen the nation’s energy security by reducing unnecessary regulatory obstacles that restrict the responsible use of domestic energy resources.  This order will help keep energy and electricity affordable, reliable and clean in order to boost economic growth and job creation.
And finally, before I came out today, Senate Democrats continued their obstruction to the President’s nomination of Judge Neil Gorsuch to the Supreme Court with the Judiciary Committee seeking a one-week postponement on its decision. 
Over the weekend, Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer defended his decision to mount a filibuster against the President’s unquestionably qualified nominee.  If Senator Schumer gets his way, this would be the first successful filibuster against a Supreme Court nominee in American history.  He argued, quite misleadingly, that the Senate has “required” a 60-vote threshold of “every” Supreme Court nominee.  That’s simply not true.
And as I’ve said before, only three Supreme Court Justices have faced a filibuster in the last half of the century.  Senator Schumer cited four justices confirmed under President Bush and Obama, but in fact, among those four, only one faced an attempted filibuster -- that was Justice Samuel Alito.  And it was President Obama who, then as a senator, voted to filibuster Justice Alito, and later publicly expressed his regret for that.
The fact is, an attempted filibuster of a Supreme Court nominee is rare, and to do so in this context, with such an eminently qualified and brilliant judge, is nothing short of obstructionism.  That’s why Senator Pat Leahy, the former Democratic Chairman of the Senate Judiciary, said he is “not inclined to filibuster,” even if he ultimately may not vote to confirm the Judge.
The fact that the former Chairman of the Judiciary Committee won’t stand by the Minority Leader exposes the Leader’s efforts as nothing but obstructionism that undermines decades of Senate tradition.  Through four days of extensive hearings, Judge Gorsuch demonstrated his judicial philosophy, his sterling academic credentials, and a brilliant legal mind.  He deserves a fair up or down vote.
And with that, I’d be glad to take a few of your questions.  Jonathan.
Q    Is the President serious about working with Democrats going forward after what happened with healthcare?
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.  In fact, starting Friday afternoon through late yesterday, he's received a number of calls, as well as other members of the senior staff that had been working on healthcare, from members of both sides, saying that they would like to work together, offer up ideas, and had suggestions about how to come to resolution on this and get to a House vote on this.  
Q    But --
Q    But wouldn’t this require a --
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry, John, this isn’t a free-for-all.  Jonathan is asking the question.  
Q    But wouldn’t this require a serious course correction for the White House?  I mean, the President branded Chuck Schumer a "clown," worked entirely with Republicans on this bill.  Wouldn’t this require a serious change of course for the President?
MR. SPICER:  To some degree, sure.  And I think the President talked about that.  I think we learned a lot through this process.  I think we're obviously looking at ways that we can improve not only how we handle healthcare, but other things -- how we do everything.  And I mentioned it to some of you in the course of things.  I think one of the traits of a successful organization is to always examine how you do things, but I think that there's been a lot of outreach from members of both sides with ideas, and the President is willing to listen to these individuals.  And if they can come to a resolution on a way forward, obviously we're willing to listen and to move forward.
But there are a lot of folks that came forward with these ideas.  And with all due respect, to the beginning of your question, I don’t think it's a one-way street some of the comments that have been made.  I think some of the Democrats. who now say they weren’t involved, early on in the process said that they wanted nothing to do with this process, there was no way that they would engage in any discussion to repeal.  So I think it's a two-way street, and I think that we have been willing to listen to folks and their ideas.  And the President's advice is that if we can come up with resolution on a way to move forward, we'll certainly entertain that.
Q    Where does the buck stop for this failure?  Does the buck stop --
MR. SPICER:  Just so we're clear, look, we're at the beginning of a process.  I don’t think we've seen the end of healthcare.  As most people have noted, I think the Obama administration, from beginning to end, it ultimately took about 17 months and went through a series of fits and starts.  And it wasn’t until Scott Brown was elected, denying them the 60th vote in the Senate, that they finally jammed something through.  And, frankly, a lot of the reason that the Secretary of Health and Human Services has some of the powers that they do is because they had to jam it through.  But there were several failures, when Obamacare went through, during the process.  And ultimately, they tried to go through a single-payer process, and they got rebuffed on that by some of their own members.
So, look, we're not saying it's the end of healthcare.  But I think that we are looking to look for a way forward, and I think that a lot of the members -- and again, on both sides of the aisle -- have reached out not just to the President, but to members of the team, willing to share some ideas both that will make -- that they think would make the bill stronger.  But ultimately, the goal is to get to 216 and potentially 218, depending on where we are with special elections.
And so we're going to look to see where we can get those 218 votes.  And there may be other opportunities to work with people across the aisle that get us to 218.  But that's the name of the game, and we're going to continue to pursue that.  
Jim.
Q    Sean, the last Congress passed significant tax reform, it took about five years, and that was 30 years ago, in 1986.  After the failure or defeat of the American Health Care Act on an issue where there was broad GOP consensus, what makes the President think he can pass significant tax reform this year?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think it's been 30 years.  I think people -- we have a series of -- we have an economy that's evolved, especially in the technology area; they just made a lot of things change.  And I think our tax code is outdated.  And, frankly, on the business side, we're uncompetitive.  There's a reason that companies are leaving America to go to other places, because the same reason sometimes companies move from state to state.  Our corporate and regulatory system has become unattractive for a lot of companies that want to either manufacture here, grow here, or begin here, or want to return jobs here. 
I think the President recognized that, and business leaders from around the country.  It's not a partisan issue.  I mean, you go out to the tech sector, out in Silicon Valley in particular, there's a lot of these companies out there that admittedly weren’t with the President during the election, or continued not to be, and I think recognized that we are not as competitive as we can be when you consider the tax and regulatory climate of other countries around the world.  And we need to be more competitive.
And then I think you look at the individual side of the House, and I think especially when you talk to middle-income Americans, especially in the context of health premiums skyrocketing up, they recognize that they need some relief.  And so we've got to do what we can to address that.
Jon-Christopher.
Q    Thank you.  Historically, since healthcare has beguiled many Presidents, all the way to Harry Truman, and certainly when Hillary Clinton came to Washington, she went to the Hill and thought that she could get it done.  I'm sure there are many lessons you can learn from previous Presidents and perhaps previous First Ladies.  Has the President thought about reaching out to Hillary and finding out how she maneuvered and some of the best practices or some of the pitfalls that she came to?
MR. SPICER:  And I think that you know -- I mean, he's met with Dr. Zeke Emanuel and others -- it's not been a -- he's reached out to several people throughout this process to gauge both their policy ideas and strategy ideas.  And I think the President noted on Friday afternoon that we learned a lot, on several fronts, about strategically how to handle this, as well as some of the members that we thought we would have with us.  And we're reexamining that on a variety of bases.  
Margaret.
Q    Thank you.  We got some guidance from the White House earlier about Chairman Nunes's meeting on the White House grounds, involving (inaudible) any idea that questions about the meeting should be referred to the Committee Chairman.  But I wanted to ask a slightly different question, which is, does the White House know now what absolutely happened?  Do you have issues with the idea that someone, perhaps in the executive branch, shared information from the White House grounds without you knowing about it?  Or are you investigating this?  Do you believe there was a leak?  Or was it, in fact, someone on the White House staff or NSC staff, or on loan to either, who provided the information and therefore it's not leaked?
MR. SPICER:  So, obviously, all of what I know has been available through public comments.  I know that Chairman Nunes confirmed that he was on White House grounds Tuesday.  And, frankly, any questions regarding who he met with or why he was here should be referred to him.  I've seen some of the comments that he's made to your outlet in particular about who he met with.  And I would refer you to his comments that he's made.  I'm not going to get into who he met with or why he met with them.  I think that's something that he had made very clear, and I'll let him answer it.  He is the one who has discussed what he is reviewing.  And so I will leave it up to him and not try to get in the middle of that. 
Q    Can I just follow up, just to close the circle on it?  I'm asking a slightly different question, or at least I'm trying to ask a slightly different question, which is, does the White House know what happened now, beyond public accounts?  And are you satisfied that you don’t have an inappropriate leak in the executive branch?
MR. SPICER:  No, we're not concerned about that.  I know that he is -- again, everything that I know about what he has done is through public reports that he has made on the record to different folks when he said he has multiple sources, he had met with different folks to gather things as part of his review of the situation.  And so all I know, and what I'm willing to communicate, is what has been made available through on-the-record comments that he has made.
Q    But to come to White House grounds you have to be cleared --
MR. SPICER:  No, not necessarily.  I don’t know that members of Congress need to be cleared.
Q    Wouldn’t the White House want to know?  
MR. SPICER:  Again, I think there's a difference.  He's doing a review, and it's not something that we're going to necessarily get in the middle of or get in the way of.  Part of it is to let him review and have conversations and look at things that he thinks are relevant.
Q    Sean, a clarification on your answer to Margaret.  You said, I don’t know that members of Congress have to get cleared in.  There was some question about that.  Who in the White House signed him in, essentially, to be able to --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know that you have to.  I'll be glad to check on that.  I'm not sure that that's how that works.  But I will follow up on that point.
Q    Okay, and my second question is -- and it's related to this -- I understand that you're not going to speak about some of the swirl surrounding this issue with Chairman Nunes.  Does the White House believe that he can still lead an impartial investigation?  Or would the administration support some of these calls now for an independent committee to investigate this?
MR. SPICER:  First of all, I would question what "this" is.  Because as I've mentioned countless times from this podium, there's two issues at hand -- there's multiple.  Number one, there's any action with respect to Russia itself.  And every single person that's been briefed by Director Comey in particular, and the FBI, has said there's nothing there.  What he is looking into are two things that we are aware of because of the pleas that we have made.  One is the leaks of classified and other information that have come out.  And two is whether or not there has been people that have been unmasked, and whether or not there was surveillance -- I don’t know why -- we stand by the original request that was made.  And I think Director Comey, in open testimony the other day, talked about what the FBI is looking into.
So I think we have a lot of people looking into this whole situation.
Q    Will the administration pursue, will the White House pursue a leak investigation into whoever is giving Chairman Nunes this information, if it's in the executive branch?
MR. SPICER:  At this point, we're letting his -- the review of this situation proceed.  And we can address that after he decides to be clear about that.
Q    Why is this leak okay, but other leaks are not?
MR. SPICER:  I think there's a difference between a leak and someone pursuing a review of a situation that they have determined.  There's a difference between a leak -- someone leaking out to reporters for nefarious -- to take classified information and share it with people who aren’t cleared.  Chairman Nunes is cleared; he's the Chairman of the Intelligence Committee.  Someone who is cleared to shared classified information with somebody else cleared is not a leak. 
Zeke.
Q    I have two for you.  Just a quick housekeeping note.  At the beginning of the briefing, you read out that the State Department stated on the protests and arrests in Russia.  Does that reflect the White House's views?
MR. SPICER:  That reflects the view of the United States government.
Q    Okay, just wanted to clarify that.  And secondly, back on -- you mentioned there were lessons learned off of what went down last week, the last several weeks, around healthcare.  Can you give us some specifics on what some of those lessons are in terms of the President talked a lot about he learned a lot about loyalty, I think is one of the lines he stated on Friday?  Does he believe that some members of his party are no longer loyal to him?  Will you go through what are some of the lessons that --
MR. SPICER:  No, I'm not going to detail, go through -- I mean, obviously this is an internal thing.  But I will say that we look at things like -- everything from who we met with and when we met with them, to whether or not we should have -- how everything was rolled out and what organizations were met with, what commitments were met and when.  But there's a lot that goes into this.  And you look at whether or not that's applicable to another situation, whether that's unique.  But obviously, yeah, you do look at some of the individuals that you met with, both in terms of timing, in terms of commitment, in terms of substance, and evaluate just the process itself, but then also, to some degree, the individuals and whether or not that is someone that --
Q    Who's leading that review?
MR. SPICER:  There's several folks.  Again, it depends on the aspect of it.  There's a legislative affairs team, there's a public policy team, there's a comms aspect to this.  But we all internally talk about what went well, what didn’t.  And we do that not just with the bad, but the good. 
I mean, I think Jonathan asked it somewhere at the beginning, but I think most organizations -- whether or not you do something really well or not as well -- it's usually incumbent upon you to think, what did we do well so that for things that we did really well, we sustain those kinds of aspects of something -- because there's always something to improve -- and even when you don’t do as well.  But there's part of things that you did that you did well and you don’t want to throw the baby out with the bath water.  So there's an ongoing piece to this.
Major.
Q    Just a quick follow-up on Chairman Nunes, and then I have a question about Jared in a second.  So, yes, members of Congress may not need to be cleared in, but to get access to a SCIF, I do believe that requires some cooperation from the executive branch, because there are intelligence places on Capitol Hill that are secure, that his meeting could have taken place.  So it creates the impression that Chairman Nunes came over here and, with some degree of cooperation with this White House, was able to carry out this meeting and then make the announcement that he did, which is perceived by some -- most of them Democrats, I'll grant you that -- that it was trying to be helpful to this President and this administration.  So it appears there was some degree of cooperation in this process that the White House granted Chairman Nunes, making it not just an investigative action, but a cooperative one.   
MR. SPICER:  Right.  So I would refer you to two things.  Number one, we've asked both of these entities, both the House and the Senate Intelligence Committees, to undertake this review.  So it is partially at our request that they're looking into this.
Number two, based on the public comments that he made to Margaret's organization, he has said, from my understanding, on the record, that he did not meet with White House staff.  So, again, I think you're trying to making something that he -- is himself, from what I've read, not actually been the case.
Q    That's not what I asked you.  I asked you about cooperation to have access to a SCIF, which is something that has to be carried out with your --
MR. SPICER:  I understand.  I will be glad to take a look at that and figure out whether or not that is an accurate statement or not.
Q    Okay.  Let me ask you about Jared.  There is an understanding that's trying to be worked out, as we understand it, between Jared and the Senate Intelligence Committee.  Is that a testimony?  Is that something that the committee has requested?  Has he volunteered?  Does he believe he has something to explain to that committee and, more broadly, the American public about what he did on behalf of the transition with whom he met with, and some of the meetings that he took that are raising questions about Russia and folks that he met with that are outside of diplomatic channels but have other aspects to their Russian business deals that may cause some stir?
MR. SPICER:  So, throughout the campaign and the transition, Jared served as the official primary point of contact with foreign governments and officials until we had State Department officials up.  Once we assumed --
Q    (Inaudible) request?
MR. SPICER:  That's correct.  And so given this role, he volunteered to speak with Chairman Burr's committee, but has not received any confirmation regarding a time for a meeting or anything. 
Q    And is this going to be a private meeting, or is this going to be --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know.  Again --
Q    What is he trying to accomplish with that?
MR. SPICER:  I think based on the questions that surround this, he volunteered to go in and sit down with them and say, hey, I'm glad to talk about the role that I played and the individuals I met with.  But again, remember, given the role that he played both during the campaign and during the transition, he met with countless individuals.  That was part of his job.  That was part of his role.  And he executed it completely as he was supposed to.  
Q    And so he doesn’t believe he owes the American public an explanation?
MR. SPICER:  For what?  Doing his job?  
Q    I'm just asking.
MR. SPICER:  But you're acting as though there’s something nefarious about doing what he was actually tasked to do.
Q    Well, it's not every day that someone in a senior position like Jared’s volunteers to go talk to the Senate Intelligence Committee about an investigation dealing with meddling by a foreign power in an American election.  
MR. SPICER:  And I think based on the media frenzy around this, he -- 
Q    I'm just asking.
MR. SPICER:  And I'm answering it.  And I'm just saying to you that based on the media frenzy that existed around this, he volunteered to make sure that they -- he said, hey, we've made some contacts, I'd be glad to explain them, let me know if you’d like to talk.  Plain and simple.  
Q    Just to be clear, just to kind of follow up on what everyone has been asking about Chairman Nunes -- so the White House does not -- does the White House have knowledge of the information that Chairman Nunes received when he came to the White House the first time?  And if that's the case, or if that's not the case, is your position that the White House is not going to look into where he got the information from or who gave him the information until his investigation is complete?
MR. SPICER:  I think that -- I'm not aware of where he got it from.  I know in his public statements he’s talked about having multiple sources.  And so I don't know how he derived the conclusion that he did.  And I think that at this point, the goal would be to wait until the review that he is undertaking is completed.
Kaitlan.
Q    Why would Nunes need to brief the President on documents he viewed on White House grounds?
MR. SPICER:  Because that's a big assumption that you're making that that's the only thing.  As I said just a second ago, he had multiple sources on multiple topics.  We don't know what he briefed him on in its totality.  And so to jump to that conclusion is, frankly, irresponsible.
Q    One more question.  When will the White House resume releasing visitor logs?
MR. SPICER:  We're reviewing that now.
Alexis.
Q    Just to follow up -- I have two questions.  One is on taxes.  But last week you were advising the press corps that it didn’t make sense for Nunes to come to the White House to brief the President on something that he had obtained from the White House, from the administration.  So my question to you is -- I know what you just said, but can you say factually, absolutely flatly, that it is not possible that Chairman Nunes came to brief the President on something that he obtained from the White House or the administration?
MR. SPICER:  I can't say 100 percent that I know anything what he briefed him on.  What I can tell you through his public comments is that he has said that he had multiple sources that he came to a conclusion on.  So to the degree to which any of those sources weighed on the ultimate outcome of what he came to a decision on, I don't know.  And that's something that, frankly, I don't even know that he discussed with the President.
Q    So it's possible?  As far as you know right now, it's possible?
MR. SPICER:  Anything is possible.
Q    Okay.  Here’s my question on taxes.  The President has said in the past that he thought maybe tax reform would flow over into 2018 -- calendar year 2018.  And we know from the President’s admiration of the 1986 tax reform, that took more than two years.  Can you answer two questions about tax reform?  Does the President anticipate that it will take that long, going into 2018 or beyond?  And who is going to write the tax legislation?  Who is going to devise the plan that the President wants to put his name on?
MR. SPICER:  Well, so on the first one, I know that Secretary Mnuchin has talked about August as a target date.  And I think it depends.  I mean, as you point out, these are big things.  There's a lot of groups that are going to want a ton of input because of the very nature that it's been 30 years.  But I think part of this is going to be dependent on whether -- the degree to which we can come to consensus on a lot of big issues. But I know that we have a goal and it will depend on a lot of these issues, both on the corporate side and on the individual side, how that process evolves.
So to predict it -- I know the Secretary would like to have it done.  He'll play a huge role in this.  Gary Cohn will play a big role in it.  I think our legislative affairs team will play a role in it.  There’s a lot of folks on the team -- Secretary Ross on the Commerce side.  There’s a lot of individuals -- he’s assembled a world-class Cabinet that has a lot of interest in helping to grow the economy to attract jobs, create a more favorable tax climate here in the country, but also provide tax relief for middle-class Americans.
So we're not there yet.
Q    So will it would be the Trump plan?
MR. SPICER:  What?
Q    Will it be the President’s plan?
MR. SPICER:  I mean, obviously we're driving the train on this.  So, I mean, we're going to work with Congress on this.  But I think the President, as you’ve heard multiple times the President be very clear -- this is a huge priority for him and something that he feels very passionately about.  And so we'll have more on that later.
John.
Q    Sean, the documents that Chairman Nunes saw here at the White House complex are described by his office as being executive branch documents.  In the early days after the President sent out that tweet, the White House was digging around for anything to corroborate what the President had tweeted out.  Why did it take the Intelligence Committee Chairman coming here to the White House to view executive branch documents to uncover this information?  Why couldn't the White House?
MR. SPICER:  Well, as I mentioned I think to Margaret, I'm not going to -- I will stick to what the Chairman has said publicly.  And my understanding from his public comments are that there are certain systems that he doesn’t have access to.  That was his explanation, and I'm going to -- I think you should follow up with him on that.
Q    Did the White House ever search the same documents that the Chairman searched?
MR. SPICER:  I don't know what he found, so therefore it would be hard to say -- to make an assessment of what he was briefed on or what we know.  So that's a really hard question to answer at this point.
Q    Is it possible that these documents were merely surveillance reports that were --
MR. SPICER:  I'm not going to get into hypotheticals, John. I don't know what he found.  And to start to say what’s possible, what’s not, I don't know.
Q    Well, let me just finish, if I could.  Is it possible that these were surveillance reports from security clearances that were collected after people had filled out Standard Form 86?
MR. SPICER:  I don't know.  I don't know what he -- I honestly don't know what he’s got on his systems and what the intel community has on theirs that he wouldn't have access to.  So I don't know what he would have had access to already.
Eamon.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  On tax cuts, it looks like you guys got a little bit of political cover from the House Freedom Caucus over the weekend to do this without paying for all of it -- that is, adding to the deficit.  What’s the right number from the White House’s perspective to add to the deficit in order to do tax cuts?  How high are you willing to go in terms of deficit?
MR. SPICER:  It's a really early question to be asking at this point.  I think the question is, as we construct this both on the corporate side and then on the individual side, I think part of it is it's going to be an equation that isn't just driven by that, but more what’s going to attract jobs, what’s going to help us build, what’s going to grow the economy.  I think we're growing around -- potentially, growing around 2.6, and the President really would like to see that growth right up in the high 3s, 4s, and 5s.  And so there’s a question about what part of tax reform, especially on the corporate side, will help us spur the economy and grow jobs.
And I think that's an ongoing discussion.  I think that's more of the driver of this.  And then I think as it evolves we'll have the score and we'll know more.
Q    Are you comfortable entirely adding to the deficit?  Or do you think something needs to be offset, maybe some other spending cuts somewhere else?
MR. SPICER:  You're asking really early in the process to make that kind of analysis before we have a policy set forth or have any kind of notion of what a score would look like.
Olivier.
MR. SPICER:  Thanks, Sean.  There’s been an escalation of the American role in the war against the Islamic State.  You've seen Marines come ashore in Syria.  There have been changes to rules of engagement.  I'm trying to understand the relationship between that change and the President’s ISIS strategy review.  Has he personally signed off on all the changes in America’s posture in the field since January 20th?  Is that something that's left up to the commanders in the field?  I don't understand the relationship between --
MR. SPICER:  Well, it depends on which mission you're talking about, specifically, or --
Q    Marines left in, I think, October.  They obviously went ashore much more recently than that.  So did he have to sign off on that?
MR. SPICER:  I think it depends on -- I mean, he speaks with General Mattis, his national security team very regularly.  I'm not going to get into some of the details of what comes up in those settings.  But I will say that, as I've noted in the past, I think philosophically the President has made it very clear that he wants to give the commanders on the ground much more flexibility to execute their mission, especially when it comes to defeating ISIS.  That's a very big change in philosophy, but I think it also depends on the magnitude of the mission, the number of ground troops in particular.  And so this is an ongoing discussion that he has with Secretary Mattis, Chairman Dunford and others.
Q    So, on the review, are you waiting -- is the President waiting until the review is complete before you announce sort of a new posture and new strategy?  Or is it as conclusions come in you're adapting day to day?
MR. SPICER:  I think some of it is an ongoing discussion that he’s having with both Chairman Dunford of the Joint Chiefs and Secretary Mattis of DOD.  At certain times when they meet they’ll update him on certain things and give him an update on where they’re headed right now.  As the review is ongoing, there’s certain events that are part of -- will be part and parcel of the review in terms of where we're going, and so they’ll update him on that and talk to him about the tweaks.
Gabi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  President Trump has sent out two tweets now criticizing members of the House Freedom Caucus for preventing Planned Parenthood from being defunded by opposing the AHCA.  Is that something that he would want to see tacked on as a rider to next month's spending bill?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that he's made very clear what his position is on Planned Parenthood, and obviously this was an opportunity to defund it.  But I don't want to get ahead of our legislative strategy.  We'll look at other opportunities.  But this is definitely one that was a way to make that happen.
Steve.
Q    On that legislative strategy and the idea of working with Democrats, there’s a school of thought in this town that last week proved that the President is lacking in political capital.  So I have two questions.  One is, what’s in it for Democrats to work with the President now?  And two, if fully pursued and to get things through the House, Democrats and Republicans work together, wouldn't that tend to undermine the job security of Speaker Ryan if the House Freedom Caucus is frozen out?
MR. SPICER:  Well, so two things.  Number one, I think the message that sends to the American -- as I mentioned to, I think it was Jonathan, at the beginning, it's a two-way street.  We heard -- when you see whether it's Judge Gorsuch, which they’re throwing down decades of Senate tradition by saying we're just going to filibuster this guy -- I don't think there’s anyone in America that can honestly look at his qualifications and suggest that he’s not qualified as a jurist on the Supreme Court.  I mean, there’s nothing that anyone has seen or laid a glove on him through these four days that suggests that he’s not qualified to serve.
And I think that it's a -- and again, with Obamacare, repealing and replacing it, several of the leading Democrats came out from the get-go and said, we have no interest in doing that.  So I think there’s a point at which both parties can look back and figure out whether or not it's worth engaging.  I think the President, as I mentioned, is eager to get to 218 on a lot of his initiatives, whether it's tax reform, infrastructure.  There are a lot of things.  And I think that he is going to be willing to listen to other voices on the other side to figure out if people want to work with him to get these big things done, to make Washington work, to enhance the lives of the American people, then he’s going to work with them.
I think he had a great meeting with the CBC the other day, for example, where he talked about infrastructure.  He talked about loans and small business lending, education.  There are things that he is willing to engage individuals with -- or groups or caucuses -- to get to 218 and further advance his agenda.
So it's not about undermining anybody.  It's about moving the agenda forward and getting things done.  
Q    It's Speaker Ryan who puts bills on the floor, not the President.  So what’s in it for Speaker Ryan?
MR. SPICER:  Getting things done.  I think there is still a sense of doing what’s in the best interest of this country that exists.  So I mean, let’s just make sure that we understand -- I think that his goal -- he came here to get things done.  And I think as was pointed out, there was a level of disappointment that he expressed on Friday.  He wants to get things done.  If people want to work together -- and I think what this event on Friday did was, frankly, draw more people into the process, to saying, okay, let’s figure out if we can actually come together with some consensus ideas to get to 218, whether or not they come from one side of the aisle or the other, to pass this bill and make a better system.
He understands -- and frankly, I think a lot of Democrats do -- that there’s an opportunity here.  With healthcare being such a big issue, with Obamacare being such a looming disaster, that we have an opportunity to do some stuff.  And if Democrats want to join in, then that's great and we'll do that.
Mike.
Q    You’ve talked quite a bit up there about the wide latitude that Secretary Price has to dismantle Obamacare from this spot.  Is that still the case?  Will he continue to try to dismantle Obamacare while you're trying to work with moderate Democrats on healthcare reform?  And also, the healthcare bill would have repealed almost all those Obamacare taxes.  Do you want to see those repealed as part of the tax reform bill?
MR. SPICER:  I think Secretary Price is up here today.  There’s a lot of meetings that are already taking place internally with the team.  There’s a lot of options that are on the table in terms of -- especially when it comes to what we call phase one and phase two, trying to get some of that stuff out the door.  And as we look back on -- talking about lessons learned, I think one of them is to try to get some of the phase one and phase two meshed together and pushed out.  
How we do that, whether we wait for the revival of legislation before we put it up -- remember, I think -- just so we're clear, and I mentioned earlier on this -- Obamacare had a ton of fits and starts during its process.  It was left for dead multiple times, but they pressed forward.  I don't think that that's necessarily a model to look for in terms of how they jammed it down, but I do think that we have to recognize that we were 17, 18 days into this process.
I think the President has made very clear it's not over, there are people coming to the table, but he’s going to listen to all good ideas across the spectrum to figure out what it takes to get to 218.  And we'll see where we go from there.
John.
Q    The tax question, to follow up on the -- the healthcare bill would have repealed those Obamacare taxes?
MR. SPICER:  And I think that's part and parcel of that discussion, is how we look at both the taxes and some of the phase one stuff.  But we're not ready to announce anything now.
Jon Decker.
Q    Yeah, as far as Jared Kushner’s offer to meet with Chairman Burr and talk with the Senate Intelligence Committee, is there any particular reason why the White House would not be opposed to the idea of Jared Kushner testifying, under oath, before that committee?
MR. SPICER:  Again, Jared volunteered to meet with the committee.  They haven’t even confirmed having a meeting yet, so to get ahead of what they’ve even asked for would be a little silly.
Q    But does it set, in the White House’s view, a dangerous precedent in having a senior aide to the President going up?  Ordinarily, we see, sometimes, the White House invoking executive privilege.  Why haven’t you done this in this particular case?
MR. SPICER:  Because I think Jared did a job during the transition in the campaign where he was a conduit to leaders, and that’s until we had a State Department -- a functioning place for people to go.  Remember, we had a delay in some of these things, and that was his role.  And he wants to make sure that he’s very clear about the role that he played, who he talked to, and that’s it.
Jim.
Q    Is Obamacare repeal dead?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t think it’s dead in the sense --
Q    Or it would have to be dead if you’re going to have Democrats working with you to address the Affordable Care Act.
MR. SPICER:  Why?  No, no, no, I don’t know that that’s true because I think it’s --
Q    Why would they work with you if --
MR. SPICER:  Because it’s dying.
Q    -- you’re still trying to repeal it?
MR. SPICER:  Because I think part of it is, is there’s a recognition that it is failing.  It’s dying on its own.  It will be dead soon.
Q    A lot of Democrats say it’s not dying.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, well, then a lot of Democrats need to get more money, because -- 
Q    There are repairs that need to be made, they say, but to kill the whole thing might not be the route they want to go.
MR. SPICER:  I understand what they want, but I think there’s a difference.  I think that we recognize that premiums continue to go sky-high, deductibles are going sky-high, choices are going down.  By Leader Pelosi’s own metric, this is dying.  She’s the one who crafted the metric.  She said that there was a three-pronged system to determining its success.  It is an abysmal failure.  If they want to come back to the table and recognize how we can do it in a more responsible way to achieve the goals that Obamacare set out to do -- but do so in a way that is going to do the opposite of what Obamacare actually did, which is to increase choice, drive down cost -- we’re willing to have that discussion.  But right now --
Q    They say repeal has to be put to the side.
MR. SPICER:  Right.  But, Jim, one of the things that I mentioned -- I just want to be clear on this -- is we have to figure out how we get to 216, 218, depending on where the number is that given day.  That doesn’t mean we need the entire Democratic Caucus.  That means we need some responsible Democrats who want to sit down and have a discussion about how to do that.  And I think that there may be enough of them that are willing to do that, but I understand where the Democratic leadership is, and that’s one thing.  
I mean, they continue to stake out a very, very far-left position.  That’s not where all their members are.  And I think that we can -- based on the calls that have come in over the last 50, 60 hours, I think that there might be some room to have a conversation with people who want to engage in a constructive conversation on how to move forward. 
So let’s see how that evolves.  I don't know that we’re ready to jump into this today, but I think as the calls come forward, the President’s view is, if you all want to get together and start coming to a way that we can come to resolution, we’re willing to listen.  But right now, we’ve got an agenda to continue to pursue.
Q    There might be a middle ground there you think?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to jump ahead, but I will say that we believe that there is something that could still be done at some point, and I think the further along we go, where premiums continue to go up, more and more people will be drawn into this discussion because there is going to be a continued cry from people in terms of the impact that it’s having on their pocketbook and on their ability to see people that -- a doctor of their choice or a plan that’s just not seeing them anymore.
Q    A real quick follow-up on Chairman Nunes.  Do you reject that there is any kind of perception problem whatsoever in having the Chairman over here the day before he comes out publicly and says, by the way, there’s this information that’s helpful to the President?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the Chairman has made very clear through his public comments what his goal was, and I think anyone who wants to -- I mean, you can’t ask someone to do a review of the situation, and then sort of create inferences  because they’re reviewing a situation that there’s something that’s not right about that.  He is reviewing a situation.  He did exactly -- and I think he’s been fairly open with the press as far as what he was doing, who he spoke to, and why.  And I think, you know, from our standpoint, that’s what we had asked to do, is a review.
April.
Q    Sean, several topics.  One --
MR. SPICER:  Shocker.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Don’t be.  You heard the question that I lobbed at the Attorney General about the hate crime that happened in New York -- the white supremacist who went to New York and targeted a black man.  Hate crimes are on the rise.  What do you say?  What is this White House saying about this obvious apparent hate crime?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to -- I mean, you yelled at the Attorney General a specific case, if I'm -- 
Q    The White House in the past had talked about this.  And you talked about issues of hate crimes --
MR. SPICER:  I’m glad to talk about the issues.  I just want to be very clear that I am not going to reference any specific case before the DOJ right now.  I will say that the President has recognized that we need to bring the country together.  He wants to unite this country.  He wants to bring people together.  He had a very long conversation with respect to race in itself, which I think is somewhat -- if I’m not correct in your question --
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. SPICER:  Okay, I just want to be clear.  Thank you.  And I think that was one of the topics that he talked about with the CBC.  Some of the issues, with respect to crime and education, and some of the solutions that they suggested that could be done during their meeting.  And I think those are the kind of things that I think we can continue that conversation.
Q    Sean, unfortunately there has been a rise in hate crimes when it comes to different groups, to include anti-Semitic crimes.  You’ve commented from that podium -- this is clear -- this gentleman, in his jailhouse, gave a statement to a reporter talking about he wishes the man were younger and he was a thug that killed.  So what do you say to this?  This is clear -- it’s racism at its ugliest.
MR. SPICER:  Two issues.  Number one, I think hate crimes, anti-Semitic crimes of any nature should be called out in the most reprehensible way.  There is no room for that in our country, and I think the President noted that in the Joint Address, that there is one issue that, despite policy, should unite us -- and that is calling out hate, that is calling out divisiveness based on the color of one’s skin, one’s religion, one’s gender.  
The President has been very clear on that, and he’s called it out before.  With respect to certain particular situations, he made it very clear.  At the opening of his Joint Address, that’s what he led with -- is a call to denounce hate no matter where we come from politically.  He’s also talked about it the night that he took the stage on that Wednesday morning around 2:40 a.m., about how one of the things that he needed to do and wanted to do as President was unite all Americans.
But I think that there’s one other piece to this, April, that I just want to be clear on.  While we unequivocally -- no question about it -- need to call out hate, anti-Semitism where it exists, there is another thing that we have to do, and, in your case in particular, while I don't know all of the details, and I don’t want to reference any specific case -- but I think we saw this the other day with some of the anti-Semitic behavior that was going out with respect to people of the Jewish faith, is that we saw these threats coming into Jewish community centers, and there was an immediate jump to criticize folks on the right and to denounce people on the right and ask them to condemn them.  And it turns out that, in fact, it wasn’t someone on the right.  And it was -- and the President, from the get-go, had said, I bet you it’s not someone -- and he was right.  And yet --
Q    I'm not calling this -- 
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, I understand that.  And that’s --
Q    -- saying he’s a white supremacist. 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And I think, in those cases, there’s no question -- black and white -- we need to call out all instances of this.
That being said, while we’re on the topic, I do think that there has been a rush to judgement in a lot of other cases when it comes to -- in particular, some of the anti-Semitic discussion -- where people have jumped to the conclusion about denouncing people on the right and asking for this.  And in that particular case, we saw that the President was right and that this rush to judgment by a lot of folks on the left was wrong, and none of them have been held to account on that.  And that is something that equally needs to be called out.  
When people are charging something of someone that is not true, there has been nothing to go back to those individuals -- nothing -- on the left who came and asked for everyone on the right to denounce something that they weren’t guilty of.  And I think that there needs to be an equal -- go back in time and call out those individuals for rushing to judgment and calling out those individuals.
Q    And my second topic, and I’m done.  Someone who was in the room -- you like talking about the CBC meeting that happened last week.  Someone who was actually in the room, at that meeting, said that the issue of HBCUs came up -- and that’s a very sensitive subject right now in the black community and here at the White House.  The issue of HBCUs came up, and Omarosa said that she would be the one heading the HBCU Office at the White House, and the President did not make a response confirming or denying.  Will this be the case?  Is this the case?
MR. SPICER:  We don’t have any announcements to make.  I assume that you’re referring to the executive order, and we don’t have anything to announce on that subject at this time.
Kristen.
Q    Sean, thank you.  Given that the Freedom Caucus blocked the bill to repeal and replace Obamacare, does the President still believe he can work with the Freedom Caucus on future pieces of legislation?
MR. SPICER:  I think it’s going to depend on what legislation --
Q    So not necessarily?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, I’m not going to -- it’s not a question of -- we’re going to work with anybody who wants to work with us on achieving the goals the President set out.  I don’t think -- we’re not putting anyone and saying, “We’ll never work with you again.”  It is that balance --
Q    Has he written them off?
MR. SPICER:  No, I don’t think he’s written -- no, I think, as he mentioned, he learned a lot through this process about loyalty.  And it’s not just a bloc, it’s certain individuals.  And again, I’m not going to get into naming names, but I think the President learned a lot through this process.  
And one of the things that’s interesting is, when you look back -- and I know there’s been a lot to make of this -- the President also recognizes when there’s not a deal to be made, when to walk away.  That’s one of the traits -- it’s not just about making deals, it’s knowing when to walk away from deals, and knowing when there’s a bad deal that’s the only solution.  
And I think the President understood that while you can get a deal at the time, that sometimes a bad deal is worse than getting a deal.  And I think he smartly recognized that what was on the table was not going to be keeping with the vision that he had, and so he decided that this was not the time and that a deal was not at hand. 
Q    Let me ask you about this tweet over the weekend.  Does he regret tweeting to his followers that they should tune in to Judge Jeanine only to tune in, and then have her call for House Speaker Paul Ryan to step down?
MR. SPICER:  He’s a fan of the show.  That’s it, plain and simple.  I mean --
Q    But does he owe Speaker Ryan an apology then?
MR. SPICER:  He and Speaker Ryan talked extensively over the weekend.
Q    Did they talk today?
MR. SPICER:  I don't know if they talked today.  I think they talked both Saturday and Sunday at length.  But again, he is a fan of the show.  He tweeted out support of it.  That’s it, plain and simple.
Q    A lot of people say it’s a lot more than coincidence. 
MR. SPICER:  I know what a lot of people say, Kristen.  I just said it.
Q    So does he owe the House Speaker an apology?
MR. SPICER:  No.  He doesn’t -- he has spoken -- for what?  For supporting a show on Fox?  No.
Dave.
Q    And does he still have confidence they can work together, Sean?
MR. SPICER:  Dave.
Q    Two questions.  One on the President choosing Jared Kushner for this new Office of American Innovation to reform government across the government.  Obviously, Jared Kushner has 60-some days of experience in Washington -- never had a prior government job.  Does the President view that, somehow, as an advantage in this case?
MR. SPICER:  In some cases, when you look at the individuals that he’s bringing in.  Again, I think one of the things that Jared -- and again, they may talk more about this later -- but one of the things that Jared is looking at is some of the procurement -- the technology aspects.  And if you’ve ever really dealt with the government and recognized how outdated and un-modernized some of this is, it is not serving the American people, it is not serving the constituents that many departments have.  And I think looking at how we procure different things and procure technology in particular is important.  
It’s an important way -- I mean, I think when you look at the VA, in particular, and recognize how it handles certain things -- there are certain things it does really well, by the way.  It buys prescription drugs really well.  It buys them in bulk -- gets the job done.  But there’s certain things that it may not do as well in terms of how it keeps its records and how it serves veterans, how it lends money, et cetera -- that we can look at and figure out is there a better way.  
Government is not business, right?  We recognize that there are certain things that business would never do in terms of what government has to do, because we serve all of our people.  But there are certain practices that we can put in place that can help us deliver a better product, a better service to the American people in some of these key areas.  And I think that when you look at some of the business acumen that Jared and some of the other individuals who he is bringing into this process can really -- I think it is a great service to this country.  \
There are so many individuals that Jared has talked that have done so well and been so blessed by our nation that have wanted to give back in some way, shape, or form, and are using this opportunity to help our country and serve our country in ways that they believe they can use their expertise to do.
Q    On healthcare, this review that you’ve talked about -- what went right, what went wrong -- I know you don’t want to name names, but would it be fair to say, at this point, that the President has written off some people?
MR. SPICER:  I just -- I think I answered that question.  It’s not a question of written them off, it’s a question of understanding -- there’s sort of an understanding of how you deal with certain people and how they dealt with you.  But it’s not a question of writing them off.  We’re going to need to get to -- as time goes on, we’ll get to -- I’m just going to keep saying 218, it’s easier.  I won’t screw that one up down the line.  
But I think that we recognize that as we go down this path of a big, bold agenda that the President has, that we’re going to need every vote we can, and hopefully grow the vote in some cases to well beyond that.  But we’re not writing off anybody, but we do recognize there are some lessons learned form this process, and the President made it very clear on Friday.
Thank you, guys, very much.  I’ll see you tomorrow.  Enjoy the day.
END 
Daily Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer -- #30
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:04 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  I know the pool is gathering at 1:30 p.m., so I’m going to try and keep this on the short end.
This morning, the President held a listening session with the Attorney General and the Fraternal Order of Police with the Vice President to discuss law enforcement issues related to terrorism and inner-city violence.
The Fraternal Order of Police is the world's largest organization of sworn law enforcement officers, with more than 330,000 members.  They represent those who dedicate their lives to protecting and serving.  They advocate for improved working conditions for law enforcement officers and for the safety of our communities.
The President thanked the FOP leadership for their support and reaffirmed his pledge to have our back.  The President also remarked that his highest duty is the security of our people and pointed to several actions that he’s already taken to enhance our domestic security, including the creation of a Task Force on Reducing Violent Crime; an Inter-Agency Task Force to Dismantle Criminal Cartels; and historic action to secure our borders and remove criminals from our country.
The group held an in-depth discussion about the rise of violent crime in some parts of the country, the disturbing increase in members of law enforcement being targeted in ambush style attacks, and the need to address the country’s opioid epidemic.
Attorney General Sessions told the FOP leadership that he looks forward to continuing to work closely with them to tackle the challenges facing law enforcement as they work to keep our communities safe.
This afternoon, as I mentioned at the top, the President will sign an executive order on energy independence at the Environmental Protection Agency Headquarters.  The President strongly believes that protecting the environment and promoting our economy are not mutually exclusive goals.  This executive order will help to ensure that we have clean air and clean water without sacrificing economic growth and job creation.
First, it directs all agencies to conduct a review of all regulation, rules, policies, and guidance documents that put up roadblocks to domestic energy production and identify the ones that are not either mandated by law or actually contributing to the public good.
It also rescinds a number of the previous administration’s actions that don’t reflect this administration’s priorities.  The full list is laid out in the executive order, which will be provided to you later today, after the President signs it.
Next, the order directs the EPA to take several actions to reflect this President’s environmental and economic goals, including a review of the new performance standards for coal-fired and natural-gas-fired power plants that amounted to a de facto ban on new coal plant production in the United States.
This is great news for states like Wyoming, West Virginia, Kentucky, Pennsylvania and others.
Finally, the order establishes a directive for agencies to use the best available science and economics in their regulatory analysis moving forward.
For too long, the federal government has acted like a barrier to energy independence and innovation.  By reducing unnecessary regulatory obstacles, we’ll free up American energy companies to responsibly use our vast energy resources, protecting the environment while creating well-paying jobs throughout the country.
American electricity producers have already done an amazing job of adapting and utilizing new technologies to deliver clean power to the United States. Under President Trump, the federal government is going to acknowledge that progress and adjust its policies accordingly.
Moving on, later in the afternoon, the President will meet with Secretary of State Tillerson and Secretary of Homeland Security Kelly.  And this evening, the President and the First Lady will host a reception here in the White House for senators and their spouses.  This will be the first time that President Trump has invited all current senators to the White House, and he looks forward to this opportunity, as well as to speak with some of the senators about the places where they can come together and make this country better.
One of those places that he hopes to find common ground with Senate Democrats here tonight is the confirmation of Judge Neil Gorsuch to the Supreme Court.  Yesterday, many Senate Democrats began declaring support for Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer’s partisan filibuster of Judge Neil Gorsuch.  And as I’ve said, these senators should get -- if these senators get their way, this would be the first successful filibuster of a nominee to join the Supreme Court. 
Leading Democrats have lamented these tactics as recently as last year.  Senator Schumer, in fact, wrote last year in an op-ed in the New York Daily News -- and I quote -- “At a time when Americans want to move forward, the last thing we need -- the last thing is a new recipe for gridlock at the Supreme Court.”
Democrat nominee Hillary Clinton said of the Supreme Court confirmation progress -- “[It] should not be an exercise in political brinkmanship and partisan posturing,” and that nominees deserve a “full and fair hearing followed by a vote.”
Senator Claire McCaskill of Missouri tweeted “[T]he constitution says the Senate shall advise and consent.  And that means having an up-or-down vote.” 
So who are Senate Democrats going to enact this on in extraordinary lengths to block?  It's an individual, frankly, who their body, including Senator Schumer, unanimously confirmed for a seat on the 10th Circuit not too long ago.  This is a judge who received a unanimous “well qualified rating” by the American Bar Association, was a Harvard Law graduate who received the Edward J. Randolph Award for outstanding service at the Department of Justice.  So it can’t be their qualifications they’re taking issue with. 
Judge Gorsuch is, frankly, a mainstream judge.  Here are some figures and facts to point that out.  Number one, in 98 percent of the cases in which he issued the opinion, he received the unanimous support of all of his colleagues.  Second, in divided cases over the last five years involving both Republican and Democrat-appointed judges, Judge Gorsuch sided with the Democrat-appointed judge one in three times. 
When the shoe was on the other foot, when a Supreme Court nominee for a Democratic President went through the confirmation hearings and meetings with senators from both parties, neither Justices Kagan nor Sotomayor faced an attempted Senate filibuster.  Both received Republican votes in support of their confirmations.
In fact, during the Kagan nomination, on the Senate floor, when Senate Leader Harry Reid planned to file a cloture motion to bring Kagan to a vote, it was then-Senator and now current Attorney General Jeff Sessions who stopped him and said, “I have a high standard before I would attempt to block an up or down vote,” and asked Senator Reid to proceed with a vote without the need for overcoming a Republican filibuster. 
Judge Gorsuch has met with most of the Senate Democratic caucus.  He has gone through days of hearings and answered probing questions.  He is eminently qualified and deserves the deference and consideration from the minority Senate Democrats that President Obama’s selections were given once they had gone through the confirmation process. 
A few things I want to highlight.  Last night, the President announced his intent to nominate Makan Delrahim to serve as Assistant Attorney General of the Anti-Trust Divisio) at the Department of Justice.  
And this morning, we announced the President’s declaration that a major disaster exists in the State of Nevada and ordered federal assistance to supplement recovery effort in the areas affected by severe storms, flooding, and mudslides this past February.
And finally, this morning, the President was pleased to see that Ford announced $1.2 billion investment in three manufacturing facilities in Michigan, just two weeks after automobile executives came to the White House and met with the President.  This adds to the growing wave of positive news -- jobs news under the President and continued the investment from Charter Communications, and his approval for the Keystone XL pipeline on Friday. 
In addition, Energy Transfer Partners reported Monday that the Dakota Access pipeline has been filled with oil as they enter the final stages of preparation that will finally put this into service.  
According to data released by the Conference Board, in March consumer confidence “soared” to its highest level in 16 years.  And from individual announcements to significant boosts in both consumer and CEO confidence generally, it’s clear that the President’s economic agenda is what America’s businesses have been waiting for.  These businesses have spent years being held back by unnecessary bureaucratic red tape, and what we're seeing now is just the taste of the heights our economy can reach once those burdens are removed.
And lastly, I want to make a comment on a false report regarding former Acting Attorney General Sally Yates.  As a matter of fact, I’d like to walk you through the sequence of events just to make sure that everyone is abundantly clear on what happened.  
On March 14th, Chairman Nunes and Ranking Member Schiff invited Sally Yates to testify on March 28th.  On March 23rd, Sally Yates’s attorney sent a letter to the Department of Justice asking for their consent to testify without constraints.  
On March 24th, the Department of Justice responded the President owns those privileges to discuss the communications they were requesting to talk about and referred them to the White House. 
Also on the 24th, Ms. Yates’s attorney sent a letter to the White House Counsel requesting that consent, specifically stating that if they did not receive a response by March 27th at 10:00 a.m., they would “conclude that the White House does not assert executive privilege over these matters.”  The White House did not respond and took no action that prevented Ms. Yates from testifying.  
That's the story.  That's what the documents show.
And with that, I’m glad to take some questions.
Q    Can I follow on that, Sean?
MR. SPICER:  Of course you can, John Roberts.
Q    I’d like to follow on that.  There are reports that even though the hearing that was set for the 27th was not scheduled, it was cancelled by Devin Nunes to prevent this White House from publicly invoking a claim of executive privilege. Could you speak to that?
MR. SPICER:  I hope she testifies.  I look forward to it.
It was never -- let’s be honest, the hearing was never -- we actually never notified.  If they choose to move forward, great.  We have no problem with her testifying.  Plain and simple.  The report in The Washington Post is 100 percent false.  The letters that they, frankly, publish on their website all back up everything I just read.  All of the letters are available on their website -- I hate to give them the traffic -- but the reality is, is that they specifically say, if you don't respond, we're going to go ahead.  We didn't respond.  We encouraged them to go ahead. 
But to suggest in any way, shape, or form that we stood in the way of that is 100 percent false.
Brian.
Q    A couple of things you said earlier, a couple of quick follow-ups.  You said you want the agencies to use best available science.  Does that meant there’s going to be no further scientific research, you don't want to fund additional scientific research?  And number two:  What other issues do you like to see the President reach out to Democrats?
MR. SPICER:  So on the first one, best science is best science.  And that's whatever -- 
Q    Best available is what you said.
MR. SPICER:  Right.  Well, if it’s not available, it’s tough to use it.  Just as a matter of practicality.  
Q    Well, but is that a code for not using -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, it’s a code for it’s got to be available.  That's it, plain and simple.  You shouldn’t read anything into that.  And I think the President will speak more to that at today’s signing at 1:30 p.m. -- at 2:00 p.m., rather, I’m sorry.  
Q    And are Democrats -- 
MR. SPICER:  I think there’s a whole host of issues.  I talked yesterday about healthcare.  If they want to come together on infrastructure, tax reform, we’d love to have as much support as possible.
Eamon.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  A couple questions.  One on coal.  Your actions today, the White House is saying that they're going to reverse President Obama’s so-called “war on coal.”  But a lot of people in the coal industry suggest that jobs are just not going to come back in that industry, based on the way the industry has changed, technology and other things.  Does this administration have an estimate of how many jobs will be created as a result of the actions it’s taking today?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not aware of one, an estimate.  I know that the President has already met with some of the coal miners the other day, and Senators Manchin and Capito, in particular, from West Virginia, and others from Kentucky that were here when we did that EO signing a few days ago.  I will tell you that from a mining perspective, the miners and the owners are very, very bullish on this.  
So the people who are actually in the business applaud this effort, believe that it will do a lot to revive the industry.  It’s obviously a private industry so I’m not going to get into who does what.  But I know that the industry itself said so.
Steve. 
Q    On the court announcement, you just said that the announcement today comes two weeks after the automakers met here at the White House.  Did the White House or the President do anything in that meeting that led to this announcement today?
MR. SPICER:  I think there's been some regulatory effort and some commitments on the regulatory efforts going forward in the future that I think may have played a role.  I would ask Ford on that.  I think it's a continued sign of it.  I think we have seen a number of industry leaders, union leaders, truckers, truck companies come in, talk about burdens.  And I think there's been several cases where meetings in the White House -- or, frankly, we went to Michigan and held that roundtable out there as well -- that meetings that we have have a very positive follow-up in terms of a commitment from a company or an industry to create jobs, to invest more in this country.  But in each of these cases --
Q    Is the White House, then, going to get political credit for this announcement today?
MR. SPICER:  I'll leave it up to Ford to make that determination.  I think that we're obviously pleased with more Americans getting jobs throughout various sectors.  And I think that we'll continue, and the President has made it very clear that he continues to fight to bring back jobs and manufacturing here in the country.
Steve.
Q    Sean, as you begin looking seriously at tax reform, could you just go through what is the President's bottom line?  Does it need to have middle-class tax relief, corporate tax relief?  Can you do it comprehensively, or piecemeal?  Do you add infrastructure spending to it somehow?  How are you looking at this?
MR. SPICER:  So, on the first two, those are both key components -- the middle-class individual tax piece of it and then the corporate rate has to come down.  I think those are guiding principles that the President has laid out.  
As far as how the process works, there are -- and I don’t want to get ahead of the folks in the legislative affairs or the guys on Capitol Hill, but I would suggest to you that there's a prevailing attitude out there that the FY18 reconciliation is probably the most likely vehicle to move some of this.
Again, what we want to do is keep a lot of options on the table in terms of do we put infrastructure in, is there another vehicle to drive that.  But part of gathering folks together now from Capitol Hill, from industry, from groups, is to begin that discussion, to talk about what needs to go in, what the way forward is.  And so that conversation has begun and is continuing.  
Q    And when do you think you'll have some recommendations to take to the President?  
MR. SPICER:  Well, internally, the team has been talking to him for a while.  I think there's a bigger discussion that has to happen as we branch out with outside groups, industry, members of Capitol Hill, et cetera, that start to formulate some additional listening that needs to happen on this.  And again, I think part of it is there's a legislative strategy that needs to tie into this.
Blake.
Q    Is the White House currently involved in any renegotiations of the healthcare bill?  And if so, in what manner?
MR. SPICER:  Staff has met with individuals and listened to them.  So I don’t know how detailed you want it.  Have we had some discussions and listened to ideas?  Yes.  Are we actively planning an immediate strategy?  Not at this time.  I think there is a discussion that began, as I mentioned yesterday, of a lot of individuals on both sides of the aisle reaching out to both the President and key staff members to share ideas and additional ways forward.  So there has been a discussion, and I believe there will be several more.
Q    What would you say to the folks who have a genuine concern that if you could not get healthcare done, how do you go about getting big-ticket items like tax reform and infrastructure done?  People say if you can't get one, how are you going to do the next?  What would you say to that concern?
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, I think -- I mean, we're going to build a coalition for this.  I think each of them have different constituencies.  And I think we're going to work with members on both sides of the aisle on both of those big-ticket issues to see where we can find agreement and move forward.  But I don’t want to prejudge the outcome at this point.
John.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Just as a follow-up question on Blake's.  Did the President himself have any discussions with Speaker Ryan or Leader McCarthy or anyone over the weekend about healthcare and making an actual vote on the American Health Care Act?  And one got the impression from Speaker Ryan today that he was going to try to pass this with Republican votes, which would contradict some of your statements about reaching out to Democrats all along.  Has any of this come up with discussions between each side of Pennsylvania Avenue?
MR. SPICER:  So I think I talked yesterday -- they have spoken a few times about different strategies, different ideas, different policy aspects to the bill.  
Q    Over the weekend?
THE PRESIDENT:  Absolutely.  At least on a number of -- at least two, maybe three times, they’ve spoken.  And I know several of our staff members have also engaged in discussions, again, to talk about potential ways forward.  So those conversations have occurred.  I think that's what I mentioned to Blake and I mentioned some of it yesterday.  And if we can find a way forward, well do it.  
But, look, I don’t think -- just so we're clear, John, to your question, I'm not saying we've picked a strategy and we're going to go with this group or that group.  I think the President was -- several people reached out and expressed an interest.  And the President's view is that he's willing to listen to them and hear what their ideas are.
And I made a comment yesterday that was -- that just so we're clear, we have -- let's call it 205, 207, somewhere in there, votes, right?  Maybe 210, depending on what it is.  The point that I made yesterday is to get to 216, to get to 218, depending on the day of the week, there are certain things that people want that would take what I think the President views as a very good bill that weren’t worth doing it because they would make the deal bad.  And so the question is, can we add the additional votes in ways that enhance the bill or bring people over that have been previous skeptics?  But there's a way in which people are saying, hey, if you bring me on board with these five provisions, then I'm on board -- in which either, A, take people off the bill, or don’t make it as strong and make it a bad deal.  
And I think that's the balancing act that has to happen.  One is, can you add additional folks on without pushing additional folks off.  And two is that, what you have to add to the bill, does it make it stronger or does it not?  Because I think there are suggestions by some out there that have said we're willing to come along with the bill, but in doing so it would make it a bad deal.  And that's an important aspect, is how do you take whatever that number is that we have now and get it up to 216 to pass without making -- without losing people and/or making it a bad deal?
Q    Sean, does it --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, Glenn, I’ve already -- 
Q    -- done with Republican votes, not Democrats?
MR. SPICER:  However we get there, John.
Francesca.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Yesterday you weren’t able to tell us very much about Congressman Nunes’s visit to the White House or to the White House grounds to view classified information last week.  A Democrat on the committee today said that the White House would have known that he was here.  The same Democrat also said that it looked like a criminal cover-up to him.  My question to you is, have you learned any more information since we had this conversation yesterday about how he would have even gotten in and how he would have gotten cleared?  And do you think that Congressman Nunes should recuse himself from being in charge of the Russian investigation at this point?
MR. SPICER:  Well, number one, on the latter part of that, it’s not up to me.  He’s a member of the House.  He’s appointed by the Speaker.  That is entirely up to the Speaker and the members of the House of Representatives.  We're not going to start commenting on that kind of stuff.
I do think that he is running an investigation which we asked for.  And I think the thing that's important to note is there is somewhat of a double standard when it comes to classified information.  When leaks are made illegally to the press, and you all report them, the coverage focuses almost entirely on the substance of the allegation and that are part of an illegal lead, not on the illegal nature of the disclosure, the identity of the leaks, or their agenda.
But when the information that is occurring now, which is two individuals who were properly cleared -- or three, or whoever he met with -- I don't know -- that they are sharing stuff that is entirely legal with the appropriate clearances -- and then there is an obsession on the process.
And it’s sort of -- it’s a backwards way that when you all report on stuff with sources that are leaking -- illegally leaking classified information, that's appropriate and fine.  No one questions that -- the substance and material.  When two individuals, or however many are engaged in this process, have a discussion that is 100 percent legal and appropriate and cleared, suddenly the obsession becomes about the process and not the substance.
And I think that it is somewhat reckless and -- how the conversation over classified information is discussed without -- while sort of attempting to press a false narrative that exists.  So while it is completely appropriate to share classified information with individuals who are cleared, it is clearly not the case to do that when it is illegally leaked out.  And I think that's sort of the irony of how this whole conversation has gone.
John.
Q    Thanks, a lot, Sean.  Just following up on your statement in regards to The Washington Post story that you say is false.  Did the White House Counsel Office ever consider invoking privilege as it relates to Sally Yates testifying before this congressional committee?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    And why is that?  You certainly would be in a position to invoke privilege.  After all, these were privileged communications between the Acting Attorney General and the executive office of the President.  That would fall into privilege.
MR. SPICER:  Because I know this will be a shocker, but, again, part of it is that I think that we've been very clear that when you actually get to the bottom of the facts, every single person who has been briefed on this, as I’ve said ad nauseam from this podium, that they have been very clear that there is no connection between the President or the staff here and anyone doing anything with Russia.  And I think that the view here was, great, go share what you know.  
So, no.  And that's why The Washington Post should be ashamed of how it handled this story.  It was 100 percent false.  The letters that they actually publish back up exactly what we're saying, that she was asked about this information -- her attorney asked the DOJ.  The DOJ said that she had to ask the White House.  They made it very clear, if you don't do this, we are going to go forward.  We had no objection to her going forward.  That's it.

Q    Just quickly following up on that, I have two questions on two different topics.  So we're taking what you're saying as assurances that Chairman Nunes’s decision to call of that hearing did not have anything to do with any pressure from with White House?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    Okay.  Thank you.  
On a different topic, we're seeing more states -- Maine, Virginia, and Kansas, specifically -- moving to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, joining the 30-plus states that have already done that.  What is President Trump’s message to Republican legislators and legislators generally in those states now that the Affordable Care Act’s future is so uncertain?
MR. SPICER:  I think there’s a reason he explained to Congress, and especially members who have talked about entitlement expansion, why we should have passed this bill last week and why we need to address it now.  This is a major issue.  It was one of our talking points, so I hope they listen.
Q    Does he encourage the expansion?
MR. SPICER:  I think he understands that the way that it was handled in terms of the able-bodied provision under that right now are leading to an implosion on that piece of the entitlement, and that there was an opportunity to refocus it, and to push the money and a lot of the authority back to the states to best determine how to handle issues within their states -- both in terms of high-risk pools and individuals that they wanted to cover.  
So we -- frankly, the bill made it a much more state’s rights program and a much more state’s rights decision-making process in terms of how to care for the populations that they had to address.
Cecilia.
Q    Thank you.  Just a couple things on the Yates thing.  So how and when exactly did the White House encourage her to testify? 
MR. SPICER:  Well, the letter that her attorney sent literally says that, if we do not receive a response by March 27th at 10:00 a.m., I will conclude that the White House does not assert executive privilege over the matters with respect to hearings or otherwise.  I don’t think you can be any clearer than that.
Q    And so you’re saying now executive privilege does not --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, I’m not saying anything.  I’m literally -- that’s what she wrote.  The action was, if you don’t act, then we will assume the following.  Great.  I don't think that you can read that any other way.  It was very -- she’s a, I’m sure, a very talented -- he is a very talented lawyer, and wrote it specifically for it.  We read it that way, and chose to not act because we have no problem with her testifying -- plain and simple. 
Q    So executive privilege is not an issue for Sally Yates -- would not have been an issue for Sally Yates testifying?
MR. SPICER:  That’s correct.
Q    Okay, thank you.  And following one issue -- do you want to add?
MR. SPICER:  No, I just -- it’s interesting, I mean, this is very clearly worded, and yet somehow you’re asking me how to interpret that in any other way than literally reading plain English.
Q    Okay.  Interpret something else for me:  Does the President still believe that climate change is a hoax?
MR. SPICER:  I think you will hear more today about the climate and what he believes.  I think he understands -- he does not believe that -- as I mentioned at the outset, that there is a binary choice between job creation, economic growth, and caring about the environment.  And that’s what we should be focusing on.  I think, at the end of the day, where we should be focusing on is making sure that all Americans have clean water, clean air, and that we do what we can to preserve and protect our environment.
April, go ahead.
Q    All right, thank you.  Sean -- don’t seem so happy.  Anyway, with all of these investigations, questions of what is is, how does this administration try to revamp its image?  Two and a half months in, you’ve got this Yates story today, you’ve got other things going on, you’ve got Russia, you’ve got  wiretapping, you’ve got --
MR. SPICER:  No, we don’t have that. 
 
Q    There are investigations on Capitol Hill --
MR. SPICER:  No, no -- I get it.  But you keep -- I’ve said it from the day that I got here until whatever that there is no connection.  You’ve got Russia.  If the President puts Russian salad dressing on his salad tonight, somehow that’s a Russian connection.  But every single person --
Q    It’s beyond that.  You're making it--
MR. SPICER:  Well, no -- I appreciate your agenda here, but the reality is --
Q    It's not my agenda.
MR. SPICER:  No, hold on.  At some point, report the facts.  The facts are that every single person who has been briefed on this subject has come away with the same conclusion -- Republican, Democrat.  So I’m sorry that that disgusts you.  You’re shaking your head.  I appreciate it, but --
Q    I'm shaking my head and I’m listening, and I’m trying to get --
MR. SPICER:  Okay, but understand this -- that at some point, the facts are what they are, and every single person who has been briefed on this situation with respect to the situation with Russia -- Republican, Democrat, Obama-appointee, career -- have all come to the same conclusion.  At some point, April, you’re going to have to take “no” for an answer, with respect to whether or not there was collusion.
Q    But my question was how do you change the perception of --
MR. SPICER:  We’re going to keep doing everything we’re doing to make sure that the President -- that what the President told the American people he was going to do to fulfill those pledges and promises that he made, to bring back jobs, to grow the economy, to keep our nation safe -- that’s what he’s been focused on since day one.  We’re going to keep focusing on that every single day.
Q    But when Condi Rice comes Friday.  Condi Rice did not support this President.  She did not go to the convention.  She comes -- what is on the agenda, and how is their relationship?  Has it healed since 2006 when he used a very negative word to describe her?
MR. SPICER:  So, here’s what I’ll -- hey, it’s interesting that you ask those two questions back-to-back.  On the one hand, you’re saying what are we doing to improve our image, and then here he is, once again, meeting somebody that hasn’t been a big supporter of his.
Q    But he called her that negative name in 2006.
MR. SPICER:  No, no, but you put it -- April, hold on.  It seems like you’re hell-bent on trying to make sure that whatever image you want to tell about this White House stays, because at the end of the day --  
Q    I am just reporting what --
MR. SPICER:  Okay, but you know what?  You’re asking me a question, and I’m going to answer it, which is the President -- I’m sorry.  Please stop shaking your head again.  But at some point, the reality is that this President continues to reach out to individuals who’ve supported him, who didn’t support him -- Republicans, Democrats -- to try to bring the country together and move forward on an agenda that’s going to help every American.
That’s it, plain and simple.  So if you’re asking what we’re doing, I think we continue to do it, which is to bring groups together that have been supportive of him, that haven’t been supportive of him, but that to share a goal, which is finding common ground on areas of national security, of personal security, of economic security, of job creation, of safer communities, of education, of healthcare that can unite us as a country and make the country stronger.
Q    -- about Russia and Tillerson Friday?
MR. SPICER:  I think they’re going to -- I’m not ready to 
-- when we’re done with that, we’ll see if we can have a readout.
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. SPICER:  Hold on, I understand that.  We’re not at Friday yet.  I will have a readout when that’s done.  
I know the pool needs to get to the vans for the signing.  Thank you.  I’ll be back tomorrow.  We’re going to do five days in a row this week, ladies and gentlemen.  Thank you, guys.
 
END 
Daily Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer -- #31
James S. Brady Briefing Room

12:08 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  Good morning, everyone -- or it’s technically afternoon, I guess.  Sorry to move it up and screw up the schedule a little, but we’ve got a couple of events this afternoon so I’ve got to get through this, get some questions and then got to move on.  But we’ve got two more on-camera briefings the rest of the week.
This morning, the President just wrapped up -- or is continuing to -- I know some of the pool just left -- but the President is currently hosting an opioid and drug-abuse listening session with senior administration officials, governors, experts in the psychology of drug addiction, recovery-awareness advocates, and others who have been affected by the opioid crisis.
Drug abuse has crippled communities across this nation.  In 2015, more than 52,000 Americans -- that’s 144 people a day -- died from a drug overdose, with 63 percent involving an opioid, according to the CDC.  Drug overdoses are now the leading cause of accidental death in our country.  As the President discussed with the group this morning, we won’t be able to address this academic -- excuse me -- epidemic with a single solution.
First, we must get struggling Americans the help that they need.  Too many families have seen firsthand the destruction that drug abuse can bring, and we must also focus prevention on law and enforcement.  Cheap heroin is flooding into our communities as drug cartels expand into the country, setting off a chain reaction of addiction that spreads from person to person and from family to family.  
President Trump has already taken executive action to strengthen law enforcement and dismantle criminal cartels.  He and his team will continue to discuss how best to root out this threat to American communities with drug enforcement experts as we continue this fight.  Stopping this epidemic is not -- is an issue that every American, regardless of your political background, can and must get behind.  We must work together from the leaders of the most -- from most local and community recovery and support programs all the way to the White House to solve this problem.
The White House took a big first step this morning in our battle to combat drug addiction and the opioid crisis by meeting with these individuals, which included New Jersey Governor, Chris Christie, who has been a leader on this issue.  Attorney General Sessions, Education Secretary DeVos, Veterans Administration Secretary Shulkin, Homeland Security Secretary Kelly, and others were in attendance.  A full list of participants has been provided.
I will say -- I know the pool was just in there -- it is -- some of the stories from some of the individuals who have been involved in this with a family member are unbelievably compelling.  Their desire to see and to work with the administration to get this problem addressed is one that is plaguing communities, and I know the President places it at the highest priority.
There was a mention by the drug -- the Acting Administrator of the DEA that they have a program where, twice a year, they gather unwanted drugs.  Last year they gathered over a million pounds of unwanted drugs.  There’s 5,000 sites in which people across America can drop off stuff in their medicine cabinet that is no longer used to get it out of their house.  The next drop-off will be on April 29th, and I think the DEA will be putting out more information.  But when you see some of the action that was taking place in this report, it is truly a call to arms for a crisis that is plaguing our country.
This afternoon the President will drop by the Women’s Empowerment Panel that the White House is hosting, led by Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi, Education Secretary Betsy DeVos, Small Business Administrator McMahon, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Seema Verma, who will all speak about the unique challenges that women and young girls face today.  Vice President Pence and the First Lady will also be in attendance.
The President is proud that his administration is full of so many female leaders from who will be on stage this afternoon to those incredibly -- their incredible work doesn’t always make headlines, but it’s certainly felt across the federal government and across our nation.  Women’s History Month is coming to an end, but the Trump administration is committed to empowering women in the workplace.  The work that we started this month will not end at the end of this month but will continue.  
The President made women’s empowerment a priority throughout the campaign, speaking out on affordable childcare and paid family leave, investing in women’s health, and the barriers faced by female entrepreneurs and business owners.  In February, he and Prime Minister Trudeau from Canada launched the United States-Canada Council for Advancement of Women Entrepreneurs.  This month the First Lady hosted an event for International Women’s Day in the East Wing.  CMS Administrator Verma hosted a panel on women in healthcare.  His daughter, Ivanka, held a roundtable with women business owners with SBA Administrator McMahon, as well as other -- roundtable with Latina business owners.
And just earlier today, the First Lady joined the Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs, Tom Shannon, to present the 2017 Secretary of State’s International Women of Courage Award at the State Department.  
The President believes, as the First Lady said this morning, “Wherever women are diminished, the entire world is diminished with them.  However, wherever women are empowered, towns, villages, schools and economies are empowered, and together, we are all made stronger.”  The Trump administration will continue to work to ensure that the American economy is a place where women can work and thrive.
Later this evening, the Vice President will participate in the swearing-in of David Friedman, as the next ambassador to Israel.  The President is glad that Ambassador Friedman will be officially on board as we strive for a lasting peace in the Middle East.  Mr. Friedman’s strong relationships in Israel will be a tremendous asset to the President in furthering that mission.
Finally, I want to speak about Judge Gorsuch and the blatantly political obstruction of his nomination to the Supreme Court by Senate Democrats.  Yesterday, the Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said that next Friday the Senate will vote to confirm Neil Gorsuch to the Supreme Court.  We welcome this news.  Unfortunately, Senate Democrats have begun justifying their opposition to Judge Gorsuch by claiming a 60-vote standard for his confirmation.  That standard doesn’t exist and these claims continue to be false.  A party-line filibuster by the Senate minority is not a fair up or down vote.  
You don’t have to look further than the voices of many of these same Democrats to see why, in 2013, Senator Tom Udall said, and I quote in full, “Some of us may disagree with Justice Scalia on judicial philosophy, but he was a qualified nominee.  He received an up or down vote and he was unanimously confirmed.  Likewise,” he said, “Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg was considered a liberal.  The former ACLU general counsel, many on the other side may have disagreed with her views but there was no filibuster.  She was confirmed by a vote of 96 to 3.”  He added, “A minority in the Senate should not be able to block qualified nominees.”  We could not agree more with Senator Udall.
Unfortunately, he has now adopted a new party line of obstruction in blocking a fair up or down vote on the confirmation of Judge Gorsuch.  It’s both sad and unfortunate. And we encourage all senators from both parties to fairly evaluate the judge’s eminent qualifications and grant him an up or down vote.  
With that, be glad to take your questions.  
April.
Q    Why thank you, Sean.  (Laughter.)  
MR. SPICER:  How are you today?
Q    I’m fine.  And how are you?
MR. SPICER:  Fantastic.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Great.  Well, Sean, going back to some issues that are in the news -- Nunes is not going to recuse himself.  In the midst of all of this back-and-forth, what does the White House say about that?
MR. SPICER:  Well, April, the White House -- I think I mentioned this yesterday.  He’s conducting an investigation.  He is the elected or appointed -- I can’t remember how they do over there, but appointed and confirmed -- or however they -- but by his colleagues in the House and the Speaker.  He is the chairman, he’s conducting an investigation.  It is up to the House of Representatives and the Speaker and the members of the House Republican Conference to determine.  There is nothing that I see that is problematic in him conducting an investigation that we asked both the House and Senate Intelligence Committees.
Q    What are the conversations the President is having with Paul Ryan about this -- to include Dems and Republicans are talking about what looks like impropriety in the intel chief’s handling of this so far, particularly as there’s not a hearing right now?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I would take issue with -- I think you’re right that there may appear to be certain things, but I don’t think there’s any actual proof or sustaining allegation about anything that’s done.  Again -- I mentioned this yesterday -- if you look at what Chairman Nunes has done, he has met with people who are cleared to discuss classified information regarding a review that he is conducting.  That’s how it’s supposed to work.
And again, I understand that when things are leaked out in the media that somehow that is a standard that’s acceptable, but when two people who are cleared to discuss classified information, or three, or however many, discuss classified information, somehow that’s wrong because it’s not being leaked.  He is conducting a review, which we have supported, on both sides of the chambers.  And I think that they should do this.
But I think to start to prejudge where this thing is going -- we have been in support of, as you know -- and I think that let’s let that process bear itself out and see what happens.  
I will tell you that I’ve seen reports in the media that the NSA has documents that they are supposedly trying to get to the House Intelligence Committee that have been requested.  We think that’s a great thing if that’s, in fact, what’s happening.  But again, I think part of this all gets back to that there’s a process.  And I get that sometimes it’s frustrating to us.  I believe that we want this over as much as I think some of you.  But we recognize that there’s a process that has to take place, and that process is taking place.  The Chairman and the House Intelligence, and I know that Senator Burr and Senator Warner are talking about the process that they’re going to go on on the Senate side.
Some of these things take a little bit of time.  And to the extent that they are gathering the appropriate documents and looking at those things, then that’s part of the process and the review that is being undertaken, and we’re fine with that.
Q    And second topic.  Tax reform and infrastructure -- reports are saying you’re going to do it together.  And ACA -- well, Obamacare, going into Trumpcare, at that time, tax reform and infrastructure were said to be some of the reasons why you did not come up in the budget with eliminating the debt.  Do you have cost estimates as it relates to tax reform and infrastructure as of yet.
MR. SPICER:  No, because I think you need to have plans laid out first.  And I think part of this is that we’re in the beginning phases of both of those.  So to have a score on either one of them or a cost when we don’t have those formalized yet -- and I think we’re in the beginning phases of having those discussions with both stakeholders, members of Congress on both sides, and obviously internally the formulation of those plans is continuing.  So until that happens, I don’t see us having a formal cost or a score.
Q    Do you trust CBO now?
MR. SPICER:  It’s not a question of trust.  Remember, I want to be clear about what I’ve said before -- I think when it comes to cost estimates and budget issues, which is what CBO is charged to do, they’re the Congressional Budget Office -- and while I think sometimes they’re a little off on that, that is what they’re charged with doing.  And I think there’s a score.
Where I think -- it’s not a question of trust, it’s a question of accuracy.  And I think that the issue that we previously brought up was when they had scored people and coverage, which isn’t necessarily their wheelhouse, they have been way off.  And again, I don’t think it’s a question of us trusting or not.  It’s literally a question of saying, they believe that 26 million people would be on Obamacare; 10.4 were, and falling.
I think that's -- that’s not a question of whether we trust them or not.  It’s a question of -- those are the facts, and those facts bear out that they were off by more than 50 percent when it came to counting people.  And I just want to be clear that it’s not a question of whether we trust them or not.  I would ask whether that’s really what they’re supposed to be doing.
Major.
Q    Sean, a couple of things that we talked about on Monday.  On Monday you said to us from the podium you would look into how Chairman Nunes was cleared to be here and with whom he met.  Can you give us -- we tried to ask you that yesterday as you walked out.  Do you have any information to live up to the commitment you made here on Monday to provide more details about how that happened in a process you just told us yet again is above board and totally appropriate?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t have anything for you on that at this time.  But again, I don’t --
Q    Have you looked into it? 
MR. SPICER:  I have asked some preliminary questions.  I have not gotten answers yet.  And I think there’s -- so, no, I don’t have anything further on that.  
But, again, I would argue, Major -- it’s interesting -- and I brought this up the other day -- that there seems to be this fascination with the process.  It’s:  How did he get here?  What door did he enter?  As opposed to what’s the substance of what we’re finding.  When I get -- not from you, and I’m not trying to be -- but so many times I get these calls that we have an unnamed intel source that says the following substance occurred, do you admit it, do you deny it, whatever -- and we have this argument over substance.
In this case, the fascination is with what door did he come in, who did he meet with, how did he get WAVEd in, as opposed to what I think it should be, and, ironically, it’s not when it’s 
-- when the shoe is on the other foot, is what’s the substance.  Just yesterday, just to be clear, we started this day with The Washington Post falsely posting a story saying the White House blocked Sally Yates.  By the end of the day, it’s “officials blocked Sally Yates.”  They were wrong.  And they jumped to a conclusion based on whatever unnamed sources.
And I think that what we’re trying to do is argue that there should be a process.  The Chairman of the House Intelligence Committee and others are going through a review.  We support that review.  And so, as much as I understand that everyone wants to jump to how did everyone get in, what did they do -- they’re undergoing an investigation.  
Q    I have a substantive question about that.  
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  
Q    But I’m just asking you about something you told us --
MR. SPICER:  No, I said I would look into it.
Q    Are you going to continue to look into this?
MR. SPICER:  I will, I will look into it and whether or not --
Q    You’ll live up to that obligation to look into it?
MR. SPICER:  I will.  But the obligation is I said I would look into it, and I continue to do that.
Q    Okay.  So you said yesterday about Sally Yates “show what you know.”  Well, one of the reasons that there’s this question about Chairman Nunes is he hasn’t told his own committee members what he knows, how he learned about it, and what the substantive importance of that is.  So we are also curious about that.  And among the things that might shed light on that is how he got here and who he met with and what he learned.  
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    We’re trying to figure that out as well.  
MR. SPICER:  I understand, and I think those are questions for him.  
Q    Don’t you want to know those things?
MR. SPICER:  But I think that, Major, that there's a slippery slope that we're talking about here, because if we start looking into certain things, then the accusation the next day is going to be, you looked into this, can you look into that; why did you ask this person.  I mean, a couple weeks ago, there were stories about whether or not we called certain people and we did -- so we're damned if we do, we're damned if we don’t on this stuff -- because on the one hand, you want certain answers; on the other hand, you want to talk about us being involved.  And I think we've tried to keep -- we asked for an investigation, and at the same time, we've tried to make sure that we allow that review to go on that -- both the House and the Senate Intelligence.  
So we can't cherry-pick every time that you decide that a piece of information is relevant to what you want.  I think that we know that they are undertaking a review -- hold on.
Q    -- is going on, and the members of the very committee themselves say they don’t know what is being discussed.
MR. SPICER:  Fair enough.  Right.
Q    How is the process going forward?  How is that a workable process?
MR. SPICER:  But what I'm saying is, the answer to that question is, that is a question for Chairman Nunes.  I don’t have any authority over how the House Intelligence Committee conducts itself.  That's a question --
Q    You have authority about whether he gets into this building and can review secured information on this site.
MR. SPICER:  But how he conducts himself with his members, when and where he shares things, et cetera, are issues for him and the committee and the House of Representatives, not for us.  That's it, plain and simple.
John.
Q    Sean, we know that members of the House Freedom Caucus the Tuesday Group, Republican study group are up on the Hill trying to see if they can come to some sort of an agreement to find a way forward on healthcare.  How real does the White House think this possibility of resurrecting healthcare is? 
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the President, from the early days of his campaign, talked about repealing and replacing it.  It's a commitment that he made.  I think he'd like to get it done.  But he also understands -- and I don’t want to be -- I'm going to be completely consistent with two things.  One is, he understands that in order to get to 216, we have to make sure that it does what he says it was going to do -- that it achieves those goals of lowering cost and creating more options.  And so we're not going create a deal for the sake of creating a deal that ends up being not in the best interest of the American people.  You got to know when to walk away from a deal that is going to end up bad.  And he wants to have a good deal.
And so the deal that he's looking for is willing to have members come and talk to him, and engage on this whole area and figure out what it would take, what their ideas are to get there, to grow that vote.  And if they can do that and get to an area where we will have a majority of the House and can move it to the Senate, then we're going to engage in that.  What we've seen members of both sides of the aisle engage with the White House on ways that are potentially -- ways to get there.  And so it's a conversation, and we're not trying to jam that down anyone's throat right now.  It's an ongoing discussion.
Q    Does the White House share the frustration of many Republicans in Capitol Hill and the sentiments that the House Freedom Caucus "botched" this?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President's comments on this speak for themselves.
Q    I just have one more, and on the same thing.  The President and members of the White House have suggested that maybe we can get some Democrats onboard on healthcare reform.  The fact that no Democrat, not one Democrat supported the last attempt, and given the desires of the Freedom Caucus versus what the Democrats were doing, it is reasonable to think that even one Democrat would come onboard this?
MR. SPICER:  No.  I mean, I think it is not unreasonable to --
Q    No, I said, is it reasonable.
MR. SPICER:  I think it depends on how they want to get there.  Again, there's a balancing act.  It's not about just picking up one; it's picking up enough to get to 216.  And it's, what does that take without compromising the principles that you want to achieve.  So is it possible -- sure -- that there's a handful or so, or maybe more Democrats that are willing to engage.  But it's worth the conversation.  But again --
Q    Isn't this kind of a Boehner tactic, to say, okay, if you're not going to work with us, House Freedom Caucus, we're going to go to the Democrats?
MR. SPICER:  No, it's a tactic to get to -- I mean, it's a math tactic.  It's how do you get to 216, in this case.  And it's engage with whoever will get you to that number.
Now, as I mentioned yesterday, I mean, over the course of 17 months, Obamacare failed and started multiple times; it went off on multiple different tracks, including single payer, until it finally came back, and ultimately, upon Scott Brown's election, they jammed it through and did it so quick to make sure that the Secretary of Human Services -- but I get it.  And so we're 20 days, 21 days into this process, 22 probably today.  So we'll see.
But I think the idea that the President has put out there is that if people want to float ideas and suggestions on how we can grow this vote and get to a majority, he'll entertain them.  
Tamara.
Q    Thank you.  I have sort of a lightning round about opioids.  Is a commission being created?  Is Chris Christie the head of that commission?  He was sort of talking about it, but I haven’t seen anything on it.  And what sort of timeline will that commission have in terms of presenting findings?  What's the goal of this thing?
MR. SPICER:  Well, there's -- I mean, I think it's easier to start with the goal.  I think if you see the roundtable -- and I know the pool will have a readout of this afterwards -- the goal is to figure out -- I think Governor Christie has been a leader of this in New Jersey.  It's an issue that plagues countless communities more and more.  And so whether it's New Hampshire or other places in the Midwest, it's sitting there and figuring out best practices and how can we get it down, and how can we provide the treatment.  
I mean, I think the DEA Administrator was noting in the discussion that we've gotten really good at law enforcement.  But the question is, how do we focus on the treatment, how do we focus on the prevention, how do we look at things that happened in the past to deter drug addiction from starting in the first place, and to deter young people in particular from starting with drugs, to now, how do we help families cope with this?  There's a lot of it.
So I think today is the first step of bringing some of these stakeholders together.  But like I just mentioned on the other thing, I appreciate that everyone wants the answers, but I think that there's a reason that you're looking at this as two things -- a whole of government and a whole of person, right?  It's looking at, how do we look at people to help them get the recovery, stay clean, not start in the first place, help them get into treatment centers, help them get a job afterwards.  I mean, there's a lot of whole of person, but then there's a whole of government.  
As I mentioned, I mean, you're looking at -- around that table today you've got families and parents and individuals who have been personally affected in one way, shape, or form.  You've got Governor Christie who's dealt with it at a state level.  You got Pam Bondi who's looked at it from a state level.  You've got Secretary Kelly who's looking at it from Homeland Security; DEA, who's looking at partially from law enforcement.  Then you've also got Secretary DeVos, who's looking at it from education and prevention.  And it is a big, big issue that is plaguing our country, plaguing our communities, and plaguing our families.  
And so I wish I could give you an answer and say this is how we're going to solve the problem.  But I think the first step is understanding the problem, the magnitude of it, and looking at how we approach it holistically.
Q    Two very short ones.  The timeline for them coming back with findings.  And then, the President, when he was campaigning, seemed to endorse the STOP Act, which would prevent fentanyl from being imported -- help to prevent fentanyl from being imported from countries like China.  Would he use his presidential bully pulpit to sort of push for that legislation now, which has not really gotten off the ground yet over in the conference?
MR. SPICER:  That was one of the -- not the specific piece of legislation, not the STOP Act in particular, but I think there was a lot of discussion about fentanyl and the rise of it today.  And I think the Attorney General brought that up and was talking about the escalation of that from the 1980s to now.  And so there is a look at it.  
But again, as I mentioned, you've got the Attorney General there, law enforcement, education.  Part of this is to really look at this and figure out what are the ways that we can address it from coming into the country.  And the DEA Administrator was talking about it, especially the flow from the southern border.  But then you look at it from a law enforcement issue, a prevention issue and a treatment issue.  
And this is a -- I wish I could give you a really easy answer and say here is the silver bullet that's going to stop this.  But we recognize the growth of this problem and this epidemic, and how do we solve it going forward.
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Yesterday, Prime Minister Theresa May signed the letter that began the process for Brexit.  A week ago, on Friday, Jean-Claude Juncker, who is the President of the European Commission, used some unusually strong language about the President, saying that his comments encouraging other Brexits could lead to war among the Balkan countries.  And he also said in the end, and is quoted on page one of The Financial Times, that the President does not know a lot about Europe.  Was is the President's response to that?
MR. SPICER:  To Brexit, in particular?  Or to --
Q    To the comments by President Juncker of the European Commission on Brexit?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think the President is very well steeped in world affairs, especially Europe, NATO, all of the issues.  He was a leader in the effort to call Brexit, as you know.  And obviously, with respect to that, we respect the will of the British electorate and Her Majesty's government in taking steps of departing the European Union.  Whatever future the UK-EU relationship looks like, we want the UK to remain a strong leader in Europe, for both the EU and Europe to remain strong leaders globally.  
I think both on the EU and on that, that's -- Ronica.
Q    Sean, thank you.  I have two questions, or topics.  But just the first:  What's the White House reaction to the shooting today at the Capitol?
MR. SPICER:  Well, it sounds like a very troubled individual.  Obviously, I’ll let law enforcement read that out, but I don’t want to get ahead of -- from what I understand, and what I have seen, it sounds like a very troubling instance.  I think -- again, I don’t want to get ahead of this, but it looks like law enforcement -- I appreciate the efforts that the Capitol Police and others took.  I mean, you literally watched people put their lives in harm’s way today to protect tourists and other citizens.  And so I want to commend the work of the Capitol Police and the work of law enforcement to continue to protect us.
At this time, when Washington is in its glory, with the cherry blossoms out, and so many people are coming here to visit the Tidal Basin and the House of Representatives and the Senate, and walk around Washington, D.C., it’s reassuring to know that so many brave men and women are willing to put their lives on the line to make sure that the city stays safe.
Q    A second topic -- last weekend, the President spent the weekend here, not in Mar-a-Lago.  I’m wondering, was that in any way in response to some of the pushback he’s received about the cost associated with those trips.  And part two of that -- does he plan to be here again this weekend?
MR. SPICER:  So, no.  Yes.  (Laughter.)  He will -- the President wanted to be here last weekend.  He wants to be here this weekend.  He’ll be here, and then I will have updates on where he’ll be going forward.
Q    Does he feel any concern about that pushback?
MR. SPICER:  No, he feels great.
Hunter.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  President Trump is reportedly expected to sign legislation that would allow Internet service providers to monitor Internet activity and sell that information without users’ permission.  Will he be signing that legislation? And why does think it’s good for America?  I’m wondering who this benefits apart from ISPs and their executives.
MR. SPICER:  The House and the Senate have just passed that.  When they enroll it, then we’ll have further updates on that.  I’m not -- when we have -- I know that -- I believe we a statement of administration policy on that bill out, and when we have further updates on a signing ceremony, I will let you know.
Q    Doesn’t this erosion of protections create major risks for people to use that information for nefarious purposes?  Also hostile nations potentially looking at what congressmen are browsing online -- is that concerning to the White House?
MR. SPICER:  I think there’s -- as I mentioned, that we have a statement of administration policy on that bill, that we will have further updates, and when we do -- we sign, I’m sure we’ll have further details on why.
Zeke.
Q    I’ve got two questions on two topics for you.  The  commander of CENTCOM was up on the Hill earlier today and testified that the U.S. government believes that Russia has been supplying material (inaudible.)  I was wondering if the White House has any response to that testimony, and does it believe that that’s a constructive effort.
MR. SPICER:  I’m sorry, who was testifying?
Q    The commander of CENTCOM.  Is that a constructive effort on the part of the Russian government in that region?
MR. SPICER:  I know there is several entities looking into this, and I’m not going to -- I will say that DOD’s response speaks for itself.  We understand the intelligence on this.  The President has been briefed on it.  So I’m not really sure what specifically you’re --
Q    -- on the action of the Russians right now.
MR. SPICER:  I think the commander -- the CENTCOM commander’s testimony speaks for itself on that.
Q    And a second topic for you:  About a month from now, the government will run out of money without another CR, as I’m sure you’re aware.  The President talked a lot about it in the campaign, and in his budget request funding for a border wall on the southern border with Mexico.  Is that a deal-breaker for the President in any sort of government funding measure in the next month or so? 
MR. SPICER:  So on April 29th, the CR expires -- the continuing resolution -- and we are going to be working with Congress on that -- on the FY17 budget that needs to go forward.  I know Director Mulvaney has talked about that.  I’m not going to get into the specific details.  I know that, if you saw the budget they put out, I think it’s $1.6 billion or $1.7 billion that he’s initially put in the FY17 for the beginning of that wall, and there’s $2.5, $2.6 --
Q    $1.6 billion is in there -- 
MR. SPICER:  Again, I think that is our request, and we will continue to work with Congress on how to move forward with the rest of fiscal year 17’s budget. 
Blake.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  A couple on healthcare.  The President here, last night, speaking to senators, said -- quoting here -- “I know that we're all going to make a deal on healthcare -- that's such an easy one… I have no doubt that that's going to happen very quickly.”  What is the renewed sense of optimism, and what exactly is “very quickly”?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think there’s a little bit of sound that needs to go with that.  I think he was having a little bit of fun with some previous comments that were made with respect to how easy it would be to get healthcare.  
So -- but there is a renewed sense because I think the comments and the calls that the President has gotten, as well as the Vice President and other members of the senior team that have come in and said, we believe that there is a path forward, we have some ideas, and we’d like to talk to you about that.  I know I’ve seen some of the reports that have been put out regarding some of the individual members of the Senate and the House that have been up here meeting with our team, and I think there is a lot of people who have some ideas about how to move forward, and we’re entertaining those.
But I think the interesting thing is, is that despite the setback that we got last Friday, I think there is a renewed willingness from a lot of members who made commitments to the American people and to their voters that they want to see this done, and they understand that not getting this done means that -- as I said, and the President echoed when he went up to the House Republican Conference -- is there’s going to be a consequence for this.  People need to be taken at their word.  There’s a lot of members that made a commitment to their voters, to their constituents that they were going to get something done on this and repeal and replace and address the healthcare situation, and that hasn’t gotten done.  And I think that’s a concern for them.
Q    And let me ask you real quickly -- you say that you embrace the House Intelligence Committee review of all of this.  John McCain said earlier today that because of the potential schism within that committee, that there should be a select committee that goes from this.  Would you embrace that if that happens, and what would your response --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- again, and I’m not going to get into House and Senate matters, but I don’t -- as I mentioned at the outset to April, I believe that people -- look, all that is -- how they conduct themselves internally is up to them.  That’s obviously not for us to decide.  But I think the question that I still think is outstanding is that what has happened is a review was called for that -- part of it was already ongoing, from I understand, especially on the House side.  And the chairman of that committee has gone and sought information and individuals who believed that information to further the review.  I’m really not sure how that’s anything other than what you’re supposed to do, and I think that is consistent what he has talked about.
Dave Boyer.
Q    Sean, thanks.  Two questions.  You mentioned Senator Udall opposing the Gorsuch nomination.  He was here at the party last night.  Did the President try to work with the room, with him and other Democrats, about the nomination last night?
MR. SPICER:  I know he and the First Lady and others spoke to a variety of senators.  I’m not -- I wasn’t keeping tabs on everybody that he spoke to, but I do know that he had an opportunity to speak to a lot of different senators, and he’s talked to a lot on the phone.  So I don’t know about Senator Udall himself.
Q    And secondly, two-thirds of the Democratic senators did not attend the party last night.  Did that disappoint the President?
MR. SPICER:  I think we were excited to see the one-third that did.  I know Senator Schumer was there, Senator Durbin.  There were a lot of folks.  And again, I think that -- I’m sure the President will continue to do things like this.  It was an amazing opportunity to have a moment sort of free of politics and to enjoy some collegial moments with each other in the White House, and listen to the United States and Marine Corps bands play some amazing music and bring people together.
And I think the President has talked about this.  You know, he’s mentioned this a bunch of times that there used to be a time when you could sit down and share a meal together, go -- and I think that’s what he’s been trying to do, is bring groups back in, and at least just have a conversation and get to that human side a little bit.  And so yesterday was a good start, I think.
Jonathan.
Q    Sean, the President’s got in his inbox a letter from Senate Democrats, and they say -- the Democrats say they are ready and willing to work with the President on improving Obamacare, they just have a couple of conditions.  First, the President has to abandon his effort to completely repeal the law and rescind the executive order.  This letter is signed by the vast majority of the Democrats in the U.S. Senate.  What does the President say?
MR. SPICER:  I think, as the President has noted, we’re willing to engage with people.  I think they understand his principles.  We need to repeal the law and replace it with something better.  I understand what --
Q    But they’re saying they want to take full repeal off the table.  
MR. SPICER:  I understand what they -- I’ve seen parts of the letter and I know that 40 of them -- saw that.  And I think what we need to do is figure out who wants to engage in a constructive conversation.  I understand what they want, but again, it’s not just a one-way street.  I think the President has made very clear what he wants to do.  And I think to the extent that some of them want to have a conversation, we have a 52-seat majority in the Senate.  If there are individuals in there that want to have a constructive conversation achieving the goals, we can do it.  But I think they also need to understand the President’s red lines.
Q    But they say, as a first step, they want him to repeal that executive order.  Is that something he is willing to do?
  
MR. SPICER:  I think the President is committed to making sure that he continues to go down the path that he’s gone down, and there are ways that, if they want to join him, that they can.  And I think there are some areas that they may want to engage with him on that we’ve seen so far.  
And so, look, I understand they have a right to put out a letter and draw their lines in the sand.  But I think the President is committed to doing -- going down the path he is. And obviously first step is to get to 216 in the House, and then address the concerns in the Senate.  But he has continued to have conversations with the Senate, and I think that, as Obamacare continues to struggle -- which it is -- the premiums continue to go up and up -- I think the question is will those 40 people understand that they are the ones who are going to be responsible for owning the current policies that are making so many Americans struggle?
Jim. 
Q    But just to clarify, was he joking when he said that making a deal on healthcare would be an easy one?
MR. SPICER:  I think if you watch the tape, it was a light-hearted moment, Jonathan.  And so he was having a little --
Q    He doesn’t think it's easy to -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, he was -- no.  Watch -- he was having a fun time with the senators there.
Jim.
Q    The other thing that the President said last night was our soldiers are fighting like never before in Iraq.  But as you know, Sean, U.S. troops there are in a support role -- an advise-and-assist role.  What does he mean?  What does the President mean when he says they're fighting there like never before?  Obviously -- 
MR. SPICER:  I think --
Q    -- that doesn't take into consideration what happened during the Bush administration and the Obama administration --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, I appreciate --
Q    -- fighting house to house.
MR. SPICER:  Yes, I think that there has been some progress, particularly in Mosul, the way that they have taken back that city.  And I think that for a long time there was a lot of concern about Iran moving in and dominating parts of Iraq.  And I think with the advice and consent of U.S. military advisors, there’s been tremendous progress in moving Iraq forward to an area of civility and to continuing to see the troops there in Iraq stand on their own.
And I think that he is very pleased with the action that General Mattis and our soldiers and sailors, airmen, and Marines are taking to do that. 
Q    I was going to follow up.  If you couple that comment with the comment on healthcare, it being the easy one to get that done, it just -- it sounds like -- probably have heard this and come across this notion that he’s just detached from reality in making those comments.
MR. SPICER:  First of all, I think that -- I again would respectfully ask you that you review the tape.  He was having a light-hearted moment.  It’s on tape.  Everybody watched it.  He was poking fun and making a joke.  There’s been comments before about how he didn't get it, and he was joking about how easy it was, okay?  It was a light-hearted moment.  It was on tape.  I think everybody -- and the idea that there’s this -- like you're trying to make it look like he was being utterly serious at the time is a little bit of a stretch.  
Q    And one quick thing on Chairman Nunes.
MR. SPICER:  But I think -- just so we're clear, I’m sorry, just to end there -- that he was very proud of the work that our soldiers and sailors are doing over there in Iraq.  There is a lot of work and a lot of progress that is being made in the updates that he’s getting from General Mattis on a daily basis.
Q    But he doesn't think they're in combat, they're engaged in combat?  
MR. SPICER:  No, no.  But, again, I think the progress that's being made in Iraq and that the fight against is going extremely well -- and he’s proud of it.
Q    And I was just going to ask you very quickly on Chairman Nunes.  Do you personally know who the source of Chairman Nunes’s information is? 
MR. SPICER:  No, I do not.
Jeff Mason.  
Q    Sean, one on both -- on two topics.  First on healthcare.  Does the President want to start a new healthcare bill or tweak the one that did not go last week?
MR. SPICER:  I think we're starting with where we are and trying to move that forward.  I think that is the current vessel.
Q    And on a separate topic.  The President did not mention the Paris agreement yesterday when he went to the EPA.  Can you update us on his current thinking about that?  Does he want the United States to stay in?  And if he does, how does he expect the United States to meet its commitments without the Clean Power Plan?
MR. SPICER:  I think the Paris agreement is still under discussion within the administration. 
Q    Do you have a deadline on when you’ll know?
MR. SPICER:  I can try to look into that.  I don't have one at this time.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Early voting has begun in the Georgia Sixth Congressional District special election to fill the seat of Secretary Price.  Some Democrats are billing this is a referendum on the President, the early days of the presidency.  What does the White House think of that?  And does President Trump plan to be involved at all in this race? 
MR. SPICER:  That's a good -- honestly, I’ve not even thought about it.  I think that if needed, the President has always been very clear that he wants to support the team and help the team.  Honestly I’ve not tried to really focus on -- (laughter) -- tried to shed that previous life a little.  So I’ve not looked into Georgia -- the race in Georgia.  I’m sure I’d best refer you to either the RNC or the NRCC on the state of that race.
Thank you, guys, very much.  I’ll see you tomorrow, Thursday.  Take care.
END 
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 3/30/2017, #32
James S. Brady Briefing Room
1:57 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon.  Matt, you had a phenomenal story today.  (Laughter.)  Get that joke?  If you didn’t, look it up.  A little delayed reaction to that.  (Laughter.)
Before I get into the events of today, there's a few items I wanted to update you on, things that have happened since our last briefing yesterday.
The President spoke with Prime Minister al-Abadi of Iraq to thank him for his productive visit and meeting on March 20th.
A readout of that call should have been issued after the pool last night.  
Yesterday, he also notified Congress that the national emergency declared Executive Order 13694 regarding malicious cyber-enabled attacks will continue beyond April 1st, 2017. 
As you all know, this notification is required by statute in order to extend the national emergency that the past administration declared.  
The President believes that the significant cyber-enabled activities continue to pose an unusual and extraordinary threat to our national security and economic prosperity, and therefore he has determined that it was necessary to continue this national emergency. 
Last night, a federal judge in Hawaii put an indefinite hold on the President’s executive order that was issued on national security.  The Department of Justice is reviewing the ruling and is considering the best way to defend the President’s lawful and necessary order.
This ruling is just the latest step that will allow the administration to appeal.  Just a week ago, the U.S. District Court in the Eastern District of Virginia upheld the President’s order on the merits.  The White House firmly believes that this order is lawful and necessary, and will ultimately be allowed to move forward. 
This morning, we announced that the President will host President Xi of China at Mar-a-Lago on April 6th and 7th.  The President looks forward to meeting with President Xi and exchanging views on each other’s respective priorities and to chart a way forward on a bilateral relationship between our two nations.  They will discuss the issues of mutual concern, including North Korea, trade, and regional security.
Now, on to some of the events of today.  This morning, the President had a meeting with Treasury Secretary Mnuchin.  The Secretary, along with the National Economic Council and the rest of the President’s team of experts have been meeting with and hearing from stakeholders on all sides of the tax reform debate.
Tax reform has been a centerpiece of the President’s economic agenda from the beginning of his campaign.  The team is weighing the best option to develop a plan that will provide significant middle-class tax relief and make American businesses more competitive.
Enacting the first significant tax reform since the 1980s is going to be a serious undertaking.  And we are at the first stages of this process, beginning to engage with members of Congress, policy groups, business leaders, industry, constituents from around the country, and other stakeholders.
Tax reform has been a part of the political discussion for years, and, accordingly, lots of people have a lot of ideas about it.  We intend to hear from them.  He and his team will continue to meet with those who support and oppose the various policy options, as they all are still on the table, because the President is committed to delivering results that the American people and American businesses will be able to see and feel in their paychecks.
On the Hill this morning, the President was glad that the nominations of his Secretary of Agriculture-designate Governor Sonny Perdue and Secretary of Labor-designate advanced out of committee.  Although he was disappointed to see that Democratic senators who had previously expressed their support for Alex Acosta, the Labor Secretary-designee, nonetheless, while they had previously supported him, seem to have stuck to a party-line vote.  The President looks forward to having them officially on the team and in the Cabinet as soon as possible.
Also this morning, the Department of Commerce and First Responder Network Authority (FirstNet) announced that AT&T will build the first nationwide [wireless] broadband, a network dedicated to America’s first responders.  This step was part of the 9/11 Commission’s recommendations on improving the ability of our police, fire, and emergency medical personnel to communicate seamlessly across jurisdictions, which is critical to their missions.  It’s also a sign of the incredible ability of public-private partnerships to drive innovation and solve some of our biggest problems while also creating jobs and growing the economy. 
Back to the schedule, this afternoon the President hosted a legislative affairs lunch on opioid and drug abuse.  The lunch was an opportunity to discuss the goals and agenda of the President’s Commission on Combatting Drug Addiction and the Opioid Crisis, which he established yesterday.
The commission, which is going to be chaired by new Jersey Governor Chris Christie, is the next step in the President’s promise to the American people that he would take real action to keep drugs from pouring into our country and corrupting our communities.  Under Governor Christie’s leadership, and working closely with the White House Office of American Innovation, the commission will bring together leaders on both sides of the aisle to find the best ways to treat and protect the American people from this epidemic.
Many members in attendance at the lunch played a key part in passing the bipartisan Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act, also known as CARA, the first major federal addiction legislation in 40 years, which authorized over $181 million to fight the opioid epidemic.  Part of the mission of the President’s commission will be to ensure that those funds are spent efficiently and effectively.  Too many lives are at stake to risk wasting any money on this effort.
Moving on, later this afternoon the President will welcome Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark for a working visit.
We’ll have a readout on their bilateral meeting for you at its conclusion.
A couple follow-ups from yesterday:  I know Hunter asked about the House and the Senate passage disapproving of the Federal Communications [Commission’s] regulations on privacy rules from last year.  So let me just expand on that a little and get to your question.
The White House supports Congress using its authority under the Congressional Review Act to roll back last year’s FCC rules on broadband regulation.  The previous administration, in an attempt to treat Internet service providers differently than edge providers, such as Google and Facebook, reclassified them as common carriers -- much like a hotel or another retail outlet -- and opened the door to an unfair regulatory framework.  This will allow all service providers to be treated fairly and consumer protection and privacy concerns to be reviewed on an equal playing field.
The President pledged to reverse this type of federal overreach in which bureaucrats in Washington take the interests of one group of companies over the interests of others, picking winners and losers. 
The President has signed more legislation under the Congressional Review Act, ending job-killing rules and regulations than all previous Presidents combined already, and he will continue to fight Washington red tape that stifles American innovation, job creation and economic growth.
Jeff was here yesterday, Roberta is here now -- but following up on Jeff's question, he asked about the administration’s position on the Paris climate treaty.  We are currently reviewing issues related to the agreement, and expect to have a decision by the time of the G7 Summit, late May-ish, if not sooner.
Before I take your questions, I wanted to speak quickly about Judge Gorsuch again and the process behind his nomination and confirmation.  From the beginning, I think the President has been clear and 100 percent transparent about his choices, if he had been elected, who he would choose from.  As a matter of fact, I'd say that the level of transparency is probably unprecedented in modern times, at least.
During the campaign, he gave the American people a list of 21 judges which he would pick his choice for the Supreme Court from.  The American people sent him to the White House to nominate one of those judges -- and he did it.  Prior to the President making his final decision, the White House spoke with 29 senators -- more than half of whom were from the Democrat side of the aisle, including every Democrat member of the Senate Judiciary Committee -- to seek their advice and consent on the nomination.  The consensus was that the President’s pick should be a respected mainstream judge.
As I’ve laid out many times before, from unanimous consent of the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals to the extraordinarily low rate of majority opinions accompanied by dissent, Judge Gorsuch is the definition of a mainstream, respected judge.  He has offered the Senate plenty of material to vouch for that.  Since his nomination, Judge Gorsuch met with nearly 80 senators.
In response to requests from the Senate Judiciary Committee, Judge Gorsuch provided the following:  over 70 pages of written answers about his personal records in response to 299 questions for the record by Democrats on the committee, the most in recent history, which he submitted within six days of receiving the questions; over 75,000 pages of documents, including speeches, case briefs, opinions, and written work going back as far as college; and over 180,000 pages of email and paper records related to the judge’s time at the Department of Justice
In fact, the Department of Justice provided access to many documents that would normally be guarded by various privileges, in a historically unprecedented move in the spirit of cooperation with Senate Democrats.  And the judge sat for three rounds and nearly 20 hours of questioning by the Senate Judiciary Committee, during which he was asked nearly 1,200 questions, almost twice as many as Justices Sotomayor, Kagan, or Ginsburg.
The White House and the judge did all of this in the hopes that Senate Democrats, many of whom already had announced their intent to filibuster Judge Gorsuch’s nomination, would look beyond their political game and see for themselves how eminently qualified he is to sit on the Supreme Court.
Unfortunately, it looks more and more like Senate Democrats would rather do all that they did in reading and questioning for nothing more than for political theater.
Finally, before I take your questions, a letter was transmitted just recently to the ranking member and chairman of the House and Senate Intelligence Committees that said, "In the ordinary course of business, national security staff discovered documents that we believe are in response to your March 15, 2017 letter to the intelligence community seeking 'documents necessary to determine whether information collected on U.S. persons was mishandled and leaked.'"  We have and will invite the Senate and House ranking members and Chairman up to the White House to view that material in accordance with their schedule. 
With that, I’d be glad to take a few of your questions.
Cheryl.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  I’m trying to gauge the probability of a government shutdown at the end of April.  Are your directions to the Capitol Hill to hold firm on the spending cuts that the President wants, or to try to wheel and deal and get a bill that can keep the government open?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know that they’re mutually exclusive.  I think we want --
Q    You wouldn’t want pushback on Capitol Hill from some --
MR. SPICER:  There generally is.  But I think that we want both.  I think we want to maintain some of the spending priorities as well as some of the reductions in the 2017 budget.  We want to do so responsibly and do so within the priorities that the President has laid out.
I think his funding requests and priorities are laid out in the budget that Director Mulvaney detailed and sent up for the remainder of 2017.  There are some key things in that, and I think that it is going to begin a conversation that we will continue to have with the House and Senate.  
But I don’t think both of those goals are mutually exclusive.  Obviously, we don’t want the government to shut down, but we want to make sure that we’re funding the priorities of the government.  
John Decker.
Q    Thanks a lot, Sean.  I wanted to ask about some news that the President made today with a tweet that he put out on Twitter.  He seemed to be picking a fight with the Freedom Caucus; and the Freedom Caucus, as you know, has 30 members.  Does the President realize how important this caucus is, this coalition is, in terms of passing a replacement bill for the Affordable Care Act and passing the rest of his legislative agenda?
MR. SPICER:  Well, of course he understands that the goal of all legislation is get to a majority in the House, majority in the Senate.  But at the end of the day, he recognizes that he has a bold and robust agenda that he is trying to enact that he ran on and told the American people that he would do when he was President, and he’s going to get the votes from wherever he can.
Q    Can he pass that agenda without the help of the Freedom Caucus?
MR. SPICER:  Well, there’s two questions.  One is, I mean, mathematically, yes.  But secondly, I think that there’s a few members of the Freedom Caucus, both prior to last Friday’s vote and since then, who have expressed a willingness to want to work with him rather than necessarily as a bloc.  And I think that there continues to be some promising signs with that.
So again, I think part of is, is that I think if people are more concerned with voting as a bloc than in what’s in the best interests of their constituents and the American people, he’s hoping that people will see the bigger picture, the goals that we outlined, and sometimes not let the really good be the enemy of the perfect.
Q    He seemed to imply in that tweet that he would be in favor of primary-ing some individuals in the Freedom Caucus who oppose his agenda.  Is that correct?  Did I read that correctly?
MR. SPICER:  I’m going to say -- I’m going to let the tweet speak for itself.  For those of you who think -- or just for your understanding, it would be improper of me to discuss the election or defeat of any candidate from this podium.
Matt.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Two questions, if you don’t mind.
MR. SPICER:  I want phenomenal questions from you.  
Q    That’s what I’ll give you.  (Laughter.)  First, we know now --
MR. SPICER:  You get it?
Q    No, I got it.  (Laughter.)  So two White House officials, according to New York Times reporting, provided Representative Nunes with the information that he spoke about last week.  And according to the Times, the senior director for intelligence on the NSC, who was hired by Michael Flynn, started going through these documents after the President’s tweet -- the wiretapping tweet.  So I’m wondering if the White House thinks it’s appropriate for national security officials to be conducting what’s basically a political task, which is trying to find information that then validates something the President said.  
MR. SPICER:  So I read the report, and respectfully I think your questions assumes that the reporting is correct.
Q    It does.
MR. SPICER:  And so I would just suggest to you that the letter that was submitted earlier to the ranking -- the chairman and the ranking members of the two committees -- two intelligence committees on the Hill, the reason that the White House has asked them to come up is to view that information.
And again, I don’t want to get in front of that.  As I’ve said before, we are not as obsessed with the process as much as the substance.  And I think that our goal is to make sure that the ranking members of both committees, as well as the chairman, see the information that -- the materials that are important to this, and then worry about the outcome at the end of this.
Q    And then on a different topic, with Ms. Walsh’s departure today, are you expecting any more staffing shakeups in the West Wing?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Catherine.
Q    Sean, are you saying that The New York Times reporting today is not correct on whoever was -- 
MR. SPICER:  I’m saying that in order to comment on that story, would be to validate certain things that I am not at liberty to do.
Q    For days you haven’t been able to tell us who he met with, what the circumstances were.  
MR. SPICER:  And I understand that.  And again, and I think that there is an assumption, as I’ve said before, we cannot condone that -- in the same way that you protect sources when I call you and say you've got 18 anonymous sources, and you go, well, I can't reveal my sources; Chairman Nunes in conducting an investigation and a review has an opportunity to have his sources.  
Our view was -- is that the smart move was to make all the materials available to the chairman and the ranking member of the relevant committees.  And I understand the obsession with the process piece, but we are focused on the substance of it.  And I think the goal is to make sure that people have the substance that are looking into this that we have asked to look into this --
Q    So the White House did make materials available already?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, we have sent a letter within the past few hours to both of those committees informing them that we wanted to make that available to them.
Q    And what kind of message do you think this sends to people watching this?  Does it --
MR. SPICER:  I think it sends a message that we want them to look into this, that I think that -- as we have maintained from all along, that I think there’s a belief that the President has maintained that there was surveillance that occurred during the 2016 election that was improper, and that we want people to look into this and take the appropriate legal responsible steps to both understand it and then address it.
Major.
Q    I want to read to you something you said here at the podium on March 23rd when you were originally asked if the White House might have had any role in providing information to Chairman Nunes.  You first said it didn't make any sense to you, and you went to say -- and I’m quoting you here:  “I don't know why he” -- Chairman Nunes -- “would brief the Speaker and then come down here to brief us on something that we would have briefed him on.  It doesn't seem to make a ton of sense.  So I’m not aware of it, but it doesn't really pass the smell test.”
There is now reporting -- which I can't tell if you're disputing or not -- that identifies two people within this White House as the sources of this information.  So I’m just trying to put these things together, where you said it “doesn't pass the smell test” on March 23rd.  Now there’s reporting that suggests that it is within the White House, that they were the sources of this.  I’m just trying to put those two things together. 
MR. SPICER:  All right, so number one, the first quote that you're reading, if you actually go back, I was responding to -- I was very clear that I said, “Based on what Chairman Nunes has said” -- the following doesn't make sense.
Q    Okay, so within that --  
MR. SPICER:  But that's an important part.
Q    -- I’m gathering that you've learned something new since then, so please tell us what you've learned.
MR. SPICER:  Right, and again -- no, no, no, because again, Major, I’ve commented on this both yesterday and today, that your obsession with who talked to whom and when is not the answer here.  It should be the substance. 
In the same way that when you guys print a story with 18 anonymous sources, your obsession is the substance, it seems now that you continue to look at from a backwards prism, which is, "What happened?  Who drove in what gate?  Who did they meet with?  What were they wearing that day?" as opposed to, "What’s the underlying substance of this?  Did something happen in the 2016 election?  Did leaks occur?"  
We are not going to engage actively in that kind of leaking that has been a problem.  In fact, if you look at Obama’s Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense that is out there, Evelyn Farkas, she made it clear that it was their goal to spread this information around, that they went around and did this.  And she said, “That's why there are so many leaks.”
They have admitted on the record that this was their goal -- to leak stuff.  And they literally -- she said on the record “Trump’s team.”  There are serious questions out there about what happened and why and who did it.  And I think that's really where our focus is in making sure that that information gets out.
Q    But can't the process, from your vantage point, validate the importance of the substance?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think there’s a review that we've asked for probably --
Q    And you've told us that you're willing to look into and ask questions about the process and provide us answers.  That's all I'm trying to --  
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no -- no, don't -- please don't put words in my mouth.  I never said I would provide you answers.  I said we would look into it.
The responsible thing for us to do is to provide the individuals and the committees who are doing the review the materials that they're looking for -- or some of them.  We don't know how many -- what they're exactly looking for, what they've seen, and what they haven’t.
Our goal is to be as forthright as possible.  They asked the intelligence communities and others in a March letter for information.  We are willing to provide them with the information that we have -- the materials that we have come across.  And I think that is an important step.
Again, it is not -- our obligation is to make sure the review is done both in the House and the Senate as we asked for a few weeks ago, not to make sure that we illegally leak out information to you.  
Q    And when you say "we have information," are you disputing the reports in the New York Times?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not commenting on the reports, Major.  I just got asked the same question.
Q    But you’re saying “we.”  So I’m just trying to find out, they're naming some people that work for the NSC, who work at this White House -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, I’m saying -- no, “we” meaning the White House, is not going to start confirming --
Q    -- who have been named now publicly for the first time.
MR. SPICER:  I get it.  We are not going to start commenting on one-off anonymous sources that publications publish.
Q    If it were wrong, would you tell us?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to get into it.  As I’ve just said, I get it.  How many times you can ask the same question?
Hunter.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  I have two questions.  The first, President Trump is pushing for a major tax cut, increases in defense and infrastructure spending, and the border wall.  Does he think this agenda has to be deficit-neutral, or is he open to plans that might initially add to the debt?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think when it comes to tax reform, he’s got three underlying goals.  One is tax simplification, two is to lower the rates, and three is to grow jobs and the economy.  And I think part of it is, is that if you look at it dynamically, as the plan develops -- and again, as I mentioned earlier, we’re not there yet; we are beginning that process of engaging with stakeholders.  As the plan develops and there’s a cost put on it, that's going to be a decision that gets looked at as well as what are the economic growth and job-creation aspects to it.  
So to answer that question without knowing what the full scope of it is, is looking at something and answering it in a vacuum.
Q    And then, just to clarify one thing with the New York Times story, I know you won’t identify Congressman Nunes as “sources,” but isn’t it abundantly clear that at least some White House officials had to be involved in him getting information here because they would need to help them access the complex?
MR. SPICER:  I cannot get into who those individuals were.
Q    Right, but it was someone at the White House, right? 
MR. SPICER:  Well, again, it’s -- again, if I start going down the path of confirming and denying one thing, that we’re going down a very slippery slope.  I’ve made our position very clear on that.
Jessica.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Thank you for announcing the visit of the Chinese President.  I have a couple of questions about that visit, if you’d entertain me.  Can you talk about the location and how it was chosen for this visit?
MR. SPICER:  There is, as you can imagine, on any trip, no matter who the foreign leader is, there’s a lot of discussion that goes back and forth between the White House, the State Department and the equivalents of the other head of governments, their appropriate counterparts.  And those are the kind of things that go back and forth in terms of how long, the activities, what will be discussed.  Every single thing is discussed on both sides.  
And so that was a long and ongoing negotiation with the government of China and with their representatives lasting several weeks now.
Q    So how did you arrive at Mar-a-Lago as opposed to the White House?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to get into the back and forth.  I would just suggest to you that both sides discussed various locations and topics and agendas and length, et cetera, and aspects to the trip.  And this is what we’ve arrived at.
Q    So what is the goal for the White House to accomplish during the visit?  
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think there’s a few things.  One is, I think this is an opportunity for President Trump to develop a relationship in person with President Xi.  He’s spoken to him on the phone a few times.  But we have big problems, and -- I mean, everything from the South China Sea, to trade, to North Korea.  There are big issues of national and economic security that need to get addressed, and I think there’s going to be a lot on the table when it comes to that over the two days that they will talk.  
Q    And lastly, the Chinese are expecting the White House to provide some sort of framework for the relationship to be viewed for.  Are you prepared for that?  And can you talk a little bit about what that framework might be?
MR. SPICER:  Can you expand on that a little?
Q Kind of put a floor under the relationship, looking for how to view the relationship.  Obviously, you had the rebalance and the pivot in the prior administration.  Is there a tagline or a vision for U.S.-China relations that you will roll out during this visit?
MR. SPICER:  We’ll see.  I’m not -- if you have any hashtags, let me know.  But I think right now we’re not worried so much about slogans as much as progress.  There’s a lot of big things that we need to accomplish with China, and I think that we will work on them.
Kristen.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Did the President direct anyone in this White House or in his national security team to try to find information or intelligence to back up his assertion about wiretapping?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- I’m not aware of anything directly.  I’d have to look into that in terms of -- again, there’s two sides to this.  One is the information side, and two is the policy and the activities and the legal piece of what happened.  And I don’t -- those are big buckets, if you will.
Q    So it’s possible.
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to comment on it.
Q    And one more.  Don’t sort of the daily questions about this make it necessary to have some type of outside independent investigation to lift any lingering cloud that there may be?
MR. SPICER:  No.  
Q    Why?
MR. SPICER:  I think you have two committees looking into this.  The FBI has been looking into this, as they mentioned at the hearing.  I mean, how many do you want?  I understand that you may not have -- 
Q    Do you think the House intelligence investigation is still valid given all of these questions?
MR. SPICER:  How is it not valid?  I’m asking --
Q    There are all these questions about where Devin Nunes got his information from, was it politically motivated to lift that cloud.  Would it not be smart to have an outside independent investigation?
MR. SPICER:  No -- well, again, I think you got the FBI, probably other intelligence committees that looked -- 17 of them issued a report earlier in terms of involvement in the 2016 election.  And then you’ve got two congressional committees looking into it.
So I’m not really sure the exact need.  I think that people are doing -- I understand sometimes there’s a need for you guys to have more information and more sources.  I think this is being done in a responsible way where people are being discussed -- what they know at an appropriate classification level and information is being shared.
Q    Can you just quickly talk about the timing of inviting the leaders of this investigation to the White House now?  Is it because of this report?  Why not do that initially?
MR. SPICER:  I think a couple things.  One is, they asked -- they tasked the various committees in mid-March to -- or the agencies, rather, to provide information.  We felt we had information that was relevant, and I think there was some -- there’s a desire to make sure that both sides of the aisle who are looking into this, as well as both chambers, had that information.  
Anita.
Q    Eric Trump gave an interview a few days ago to Forbes Magazine in which he said that he would update his father regularly, perhaps quarterly, on the business, including giving profitability reports.  So I had two questions about that.  One is, have they spoken about the business since January?  And two, how does this not violate what the President set out as the protocols for how he would deal with the business?  
MR. SPICER:  Well, two things.  I don’t know if they’ve spoken.  It’s not -- this may be a question better directed to the Trump organization.  But secondly, I think everything that he’s done is in accordance with what the Counsel’s Office and the ethics folks --
Q    Just following up, I believe he said the he wasn’t going to talk to his children, his sons, about the business.  So how is that --
Q    Again, I think everything that is being done in terms of reports or updates is being done in a consultation with the Counsel’s Office.  So I think that’s -- 
Justin.
Q    I have two things I want to ask.  The first is just to follow up on Major and ask about the substance.  It’s sort of unclear what you guys are telling the chairman and the ranking members you have.  Is it information that would validate the President’s claims about surveillance during the 2016 campaign?  Or is it information about their broader Russia investigation?  I’m trying to --
MR. SPICER:  Again, I’m not here to share that.  That’s why we’ve invited them up to view it in a classified setting, in an appropriate setting.  It’s not to be shared with people that don’t have the appropriate clearances and access to --
Q    But you're not intending to imply that this is the information that Chairman Nunes has been talking about.
MR. SPICER:  No, what I'm suggesting is that there has been information that has been -- material that has been made come to light, and that we want to make sure that the people who are conducting the review have that information, have access to it.
Q    And then, Westinghouse Center filed for bankruptcy yesterday.  I'm wondering if that's prompted national security concerns in the administration, and if there is any effort within the administration to sort of help them navigate this bankruptcy, considering that the --
MR. SPICER:  I'll have to check on that.  I think there's obviously a couple departments that would be interested in that.
Steve.
Q    Sean, I just want to ask you to elaborate more on what you have so far told us.  You said that in the ordinary course of business, the national security staff discovered documents.  Can you explain how these documents were uncovered?  What does it mean "in the course of business"?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t think -- no, I'm not.  That's why we've invited them up into a classified setting, is for them to see these materials and understand it.  This is not the setting that is appropriate to discuss that.  
Q    So who in the national security staff, then, uncovered the documents?
MR. SPICER:  Good question.  That is not -- again, as I've mentioned multiple times, we're not here to go through the process.  Our job is to get to the substance of this and to make sure that the people who have the appropriate access and authority to look into this matter, and then take appropriate steps.
Q    Are you in a position right now to deny or rule out the possibility that members of the national security staff have already informed the Chairman of the House Intelligence Committee?
MR. SPICER:  I'm not going to get into any further details on this.  I would just suggest to you -- again, if I can go back for a second to something that the Obama administration's Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense noted very clearly on the record, that they were engaged in an effort to spread information about Trump officials that had come up in intelligence.  That's not -- that is several networks.  Evelyn Farkas made that proclamation about what was going on during the Obama administration regarding the Trump team.  So that is something that they made very clear on the record.
John.
Q    A couple of things, Sean.  First of all, on the Freedom Caucus, in response to the President's tweet, Congressman Amash of Michigan responded on camera, saying, most people don’t like to be bullied -- in response to the President -- also saying that sending out such tweets is constructive in the 5th grade and it may allow a child to get his way, but that's not how government works.  Could you take a moment to respond to Congressman Amash?  Was the President trying to bully the Freedom Caucus?
MR. SPICER:  No.  I think this is consistent with everything that he has said since Friday of last week.  And I think that he is looking for members on both sides of the aisle, who want to be constructive, to achieve the goal of a patient-centered healthcare system.  That's it, plain and simple.
And I think that his comments and his tweets speak for themselves with respect to how he feels and why.
Q    Following on that, is this a divide-and-conquer strategy?
MR. SPICER:  No, it's a math strategy, which is to get to 216 and pass an effort, and continue to move the agenda forward.
Q    And then if I could, following on what Major said, you've accused people in this room several times of being more interested in the process than actually in substance of things.  But when information is discovered by the Intelligence Committee Chairman in the House, at the White House, that is potentially exculpatory to what the President has tweeted out, and it's reported that one of the people who was involved in uncovering that information is a White House staff member who was kept in his position over the request of the National Security Advisor by the political leadership here at the White House, does the process not then take on some relevance?
MR. SPICER:  Well, the process in the sense that we are -- as I've noted, we have invited the chairman and the ranking members who are looking into this and reviewing the matter up here.  That doesn’t mean that we allow uncleared members from the media to come in and look at it.  That means --
Q    I'm not asking that question.
MR. SPICER:  No, you are.  You said --
Q    No, I'm not asking that question.
MR. SPICER:  But I think it is, because --
Q    That's not what I asked.  What I asked was, when you have that connection of dots all the way along, does the process, the prominence of this information not become relevant to the overall investigation?
MR. SPICER:  It's for the people who are conducting the review to decide that, not for the people in this room to decide it.  It is up to the people who are cleared to look at that information and that material, to look at it and make their evaluations.  And I think they are conducting their review.  You've seen very clearly, both on the House side and then starting today on the Senate side, them looking into this matter.  That is the appropriate venue, forum, and personnel to be reviewing it, plain and simple.
Q    Sean, a quick follow up on that.
MR. SPICER:  Zeke.
Q    You mentioned a couple of times --
MR. SPICER:  Zeke.
Q    Thank you.  Has the President already been briefed on this information --
MR. SPICER:  I'm sorry, I couldn’t hear you.
Q    Has the President been briefed on this information that you're now inviting the congressional committee chairs to come in and view?  And when was he briefed on it?
MR. SPICER:  I will look into that.  I'm not entirely sure when or what the status of that is, but I can follow up on that.
Q    So then why would you brief -- why would the White House brief congressional --
MR. SPICER:  I understand the question.  Like I said, I will look into whether or not -- where that stands.  
Blake.
Q    Sean, thanks.  A couple on taxes.  The timeline here had been healthcare first, tax reform second.  There was a Fox poll out, released yesterday, that said 73 percent of Americans want tax reform to happen this year.  With healthcare now at least being on hold, is healthcare the number-one priority for this administration -- is tax reform the number-one priority for this administration at this point, or is healthcare still kind of taking up some of the oxygen?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I don’t know that it's taking up oxygen.  I think there's plenty of oxygen for both to go on.  I think the President would still like to see it done.  But I think there's no reason that we can't -- I mean, if you look at the timeline for tax reform, you're talking several months, and so I think the process is beginning on that, and I think you can have a dual-track strategy.  It's not an either/or proposition.
Q    And you described what was going on with the meeting today as the first phase.  Can you lay out to us what is somewhat entailed with that first phase?  Is the President being given detailed strategies?  Or is it broad principles?  What is involved in this first phase?
MR. SPICER:  I think it's a little of both.  They're talking about the process that they intend to partake -- how this is going to lay out, who they're engaging with, how they're going to begin that process, and then some of the guiding principles in making sure that any updates that he has or any principles that he wants to suggest are incorporated into that plan as they begin to meet with stakeholders.  But part of this is to level-set with him as to what they intend to do and how they intend to do it.
Q    And you just mentioned a dual track between healthcare and tax reform, but then there's also infrastructure hanging out there.  So can all of those go together?
MR. SPICER:  Lots of tracks.  I mean, again, remember they're not all the same people; some of them overlap, some of them don’t.  But I think part of this is, is that you got to remember that some things can happen sooner than others because of the legislative calendar.  Some things are going to take longer because of both the legislative calendar and because of the number of individuals involved and the complexity of the situation.  But there's a lot of things that can be moving at once because of how they'll play out.
John Gizzi.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  Turning to the foreign front, yesterday, Vladimir Kara-Murza, the twice-poisoned Russian dissident and vice-chairman of the Open Russia Movement, testified before a Senate appropriations subcommittee, backing continued sanctions against Russia.  He also called on Secretary of State Tillerson to meet with Russian civil society members --in other words, anti-Putin dissidents like himself -- when he makes his trip to Moscow next month.
Mr. Kara-Murza also said he was meeting with many members of Congress of both parties, but he would be very happy to meet with any administration officials.  Are there any plans for the President or anyone in the White House to meet with Mr. Kara-Murza?  And will Mr. Tillerson meet with the Russian civil society?
MR. SPICER:  I would suggest to you -- I'm not aware of anything.  Both the National Security Council, as well as the State Department are probably more appropriate for you to address that to.
Alexis.
Q    Sean, can I ask a question -- but before I do, get some clarification on the answer that you gave to Hunter and to Major?  I thought it was just yesterday that you said that when you were asked who cleared in Chairman Nunes, that you had asked some preliminary questions and not gotten answers, and that you would continue to ask.  
MR. SPICER:  Yeah.
Q    So my question today is, you know the answers to that and you are saying you will not answer that question today?  Or you don't know?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, that's not -- right.  So what I’m saying to you is, is that the decision that has been made is to bring in all the relevant individuals that are reviewing the situation and make them available; that getting into sources and process is not the proper way to conduct this review.  And we want the people who are conducting it to understand more fully the materials -- not necessarily who came in what time and whatever.  
Q    So you're -- just to clarify again, you asked the questions?  You were not given answers?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, that's -- I’m just saying that -- 
Q    You said yesterday you asked that -- wait, let me finish.  You said yesterday that you asked, you didn't get the answers.  And so what you're telling us today is you are never going to get the answer -- you, yourself -- you are never going to get the answer to who cleared in Chairman Nunes?
MR. SPICER:  What I’m saying is, is that the decision was made -- it’s supposed to focus on the process, to focus on the substance, and that the decision was made -- 
Q    You're not answering my question.
MR. SPICER:  I let you ask the question, so let me answer it, please.
And the answer that I’m giving you is that the decision was made internally to focus on the individuals who are doing the review, both Republicans and the Democrats, House and Senate, and have them come in and look at the materials.  That's what the focus should be, Alexis.
Kaitlan.
Q    Wait, wait, wait, here’s my bigger question.  The President has expressed his affirmation, his support for the finding that Russia interfered with the 2016 election.  That is the centerpiece of the investigation at the FBI and the Senate Intelligence Committee.  My question is -- can you update us, what is the President doing now in the administration to respond to Director Comey’s testimony that that interference is not just election-year-based but continuing?
MR. SPICER:  You're talking about the executive order, is that correct? 
Q    I just asked, can you update what is the administration doing to prevent that, to -- 
MR. SPICER:  So okay -- 
Q    -- to respond to that preliminary finding already, that we already know, that it is continuing?  
MR. SPICER:  Well, so the executive order that the President signed that continues the national emergency deals with looking into malicious attempts and cyber attempts to come into the United States.  That's what the executive order that he signed was.
Q    That's the sum total of the response so far?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I’m not going to get into what’s being done behind the scenes in terms of the intelligence and law enforcement community.  But the bottom line is that there was an emergency declared with respect to challenges that the United States faces from a variety of actors outside the United States to come in and use cyber techniques to hack the United States.  The national emergency will continue under the President to address the threats that we face from abroad and from a variety of places.  
April.
Q    Sean?  
Q    Wait, no.  I was just going to --
Q    Sean?
MR. SPICER:  April.  
Q    Yes, Sean.  
MR. SPICER:  We’ll get to you.  (Laughter.)  
Q    He called on someone else?  I’m sorry.  Go ahead, and then come back to me. 
MR. SPICER:  Okay, I’ll do Kaitlan and then April.  I’m sorry.
Q    She can go first, but I’ll just go after her. 
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Okay, thank you, Kaitlan.  So, Sean, what is the ultimate goal of the leaders coming in to get this information?  And will it be information that Nunes received plus?  Or will it just be basically a synopsis of a synopsis of what Nunes received?
MR. SPICER:  Well, it's going to be the materials that are relevant to the discussion in the area that they’re reviewing.  And that's up to them to decide the relevancy of that.  I think we have, from the National Security Committee, has gone into -- come upon some materials that they want to share with them.  It's up to them to make a decision about the relevance of those documents and what they would lead them to believe.  
But there’s two issues here.  One, April, is what do they see, and then what do they want to see in addition to that or as a result of those materials.  Right?  So, in other words, they may see things and say, hey, this is interesting, I wonder if there’s a pattern; this is interesting, I want to see more.  Or they may come to a conclusion right away. 
But that's part of the idea of -- to the first part of your question -- in sharing information with them is to allow the members of both of the committees on a bipartisan basis to come in to review materials that we think are relevant to the issues that the President talked about with respect to surveillance, the masking -- unmasking of individuals, the handling of it, et cetera, et cetera.  And then it's up to those members to decide what to do with that information, how to explore that more in depth.
Q    So, ultimately, in their questioning, they could actually wind up reviewing what Nunes received, possibly?  If they do, even ask different questions, just sitting in the intelligence meetings like the President does -- if he decides to give more he'll give more?
MR. SPICER:  It depends.  I think that's possible.  I don't want to prejudge what they ask and what comes in response to it. It also has to do with what documents we have.  They may go down a particular trail and have to follow up with an agency and say, we saw this, can we see a follow-up on that.  As you saw from many reports the NSA has been asked to provide documentation to the House.  My understanding from the reports is that that was ongoing.  And maybe some of the materials that they see prompt them to ask additional questions.
But that's part of providing it to them.  It's an ongoing review.  And what we want is for them to see these materials and come to conclusions, or need more information to come to conclusions.  But this is part of that review process.
Q    Are they allowed to -- the type of briefing, with their ranking and who they are -- no matter if they may be head of the Intel Committee, are some of these other members allowed to see the same things that he sees?  Even though they are not head of -- I mean, are they allowed to see that? 
 
MR. SPICER:  My understanding would be that they would.
Q    Okay.  And lastly, Sean, do you know who allowed him to come in?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    You don't know?
MR. SPICER:  No.
Kaitlan.
Q    I have two questions for you.  One is did anyone in the White House ever raise the possibility of a Cabinet position or a top intelligence post later on in the administration for Devin Nunes?
MR. SPICER:  Not that I'm aware.
Q    And secondly, will the President hold a press conference so he can answer questions on the surveillance claims and all these intelligence revelations himself?
MR. SPICER:  I'm not good enough?
Q    Not that you're not good enough, but he’s the one who made the claims.  You didn’t make the claims, he made the claims.
MR. SPICER:  I will convey your request to him.  I know that as I've said before, we'll see.  I'm sure that at some point -- he enjoyed the last one so much --
Q    Tomorrow?
MR. SPICER:  Is that what you’d like, tomorrow?
Q    That works.
MR. SPICER:  Does that work for you?  (Laughter.)  Okay, well, let me see what I can come up with.
Cecilia.
Q    I just want to clarify, do you believe -- from what you know about these materials, do they validate the President’s wiretapped claim?
MR. SPICER:  I don't know.  I have not seen the materials.  It is members of the National Security Committee who have come across these documents that want to make them available to the members who are leading the review.
Q    And why not just be more forthcoming about this entire process of who let Nunes in?  If this was enough -- if the President of the United States could tweet this claim about wiretapping, doesn’t the American public have a right to know more?
MR. SPICER:  Yes, they do.  And I think that's why we're going through a process.  And I say this respectfully -- I understand that you want all the process answers -- what day did they come in, what were they wearing, what door did they come in. The relevant questions are about the substance of this.  And it's interesting -- I don't get the same thing when I see these unpublished stories with anonymous sources.  You don't ever tell me who your sources were, who --
Q    Because you're --
MR. SPICER:  Glenn, I'm actually asking Cecilia’s question -- if you could be as polite as not to interrupt her.
Q    I'm sorry.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.
Do you accept his apology?
Q    One hundred percent.  (Laughter.)  
MR. SPICER:  That's very --
Q    In fact, I will cede the floor to Glenn.
MR. SPICER:  Thank you.  That's not how it works, though.  
But I would argue that you guys have -- when you write a story, and you call and say, I have four anonymous sources that say whatever, and I say, okay, well, who are the sources and where are they coming -- you go, sorry, I'm not revealing anything to you, but the substance that I'm asking you to respond to -- well, when the shoe is on the other foot you're all about the process.
The bottom line is that there are two congressional committees that are conducting reviews of this situation, and those committees are looking at the relevant information and talking to the relevant people.
To your point about the process, we have made individuals available and encouraged individuals to testify or to meet with or to discuss that have been approached.  So I think that what we are doing is frankly -- and I know you probably disagree, but I think we are doing the responsible thing by making sure that documents and materials are shown to people with the appropriate classifications in the appropriate settings, and that the people that the different committees would like to discuss these matters with are made available to them.  I think that's the responsible way of handling this.
Q    Sean, thank you very much.  I have two questions, one on Venezuela and another one on climate policy.  With respect to Venezuela, because today the Supreme Court of Venezuela said they would take -- try to take over the Congress powers and the opposition said a coup is underway.  Do you consider there is a coup underway in Venezuela, and what can we expect the United States to do?
And the other question is on climate change, because President Obama signed also the bilateral climate deals with Brazil, China and India.  And what do you have to those?
MR. SPICER:  Well, on the first one, respectfully, I would send you to the -- I would refer you to the State Department.  The only Supreme Court I’m really focused on right now is ours and getting Judge Neil Gorsuch confirmed by the Senate.  So I’d be glad -- I think the State Department is more of an appropriate venue to discuss the activities over there.
And second, I think when it comes to things like the Paris treaty, as I mentioned at the outset, that is being --
Q    Those are separate --
MR. SPICER:  I understand, but I think that there are things that we will have updates for on all of these things as we move forward.  Right now, I’ve got nothing on that subject.
Yes.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  The Wall Street Journal reported this morning that the Trump administration is proposing more modest changes to NAFTA.  Like, for example, they’re leaving the arbitration panel that deals with trade disputes in place, et cetera, et cetera.  Is the White House backing away from some of the more sweeping changes to NAFTA that the President proposed during the campaign?
MR. SPICER:  I would just argue that Robert Lighthizer isn’t even nominated yet.  That is not a statement of administration policy at this point.  There is nothing in those documents that we are confirming -- or in that report, rather, that we are confirming.  That is not a statement of administration policy. That is not an accurate assessment of where we are at this time.
And I think our goal is to get Robert Lighthizer appointed as the next ambassador and U.S. Trade Representative, and then when we have that we will have plenty of updates on where we go with respect to NAFTA and the rest of our trade agreement.
With that, I’m going to say goodbye.  I will see you tomorrow.  Thank you -- oh, I’m sorry, I promised two days in a row.  
Q    Thank you.  I’ve got one on foreign policy and one on domestic policy.  First one is, many Republicans were very critical about how President Obama had handled the Iranian Green Revolution about six years ago.  So my question is, if mass protests across Russia develop into a movement, is this something that -- what does the administration feel its role should be regarding that?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not going to -- that’s a hypothetical question to talk about what would happen and if --
Q    No, it’s not -- 
MR. SPICER:  I know, but when it comes to protests we obviously encourage, as we did last Sunday, the peaceful protest -- the government of Russia to allow the peaceful protest of individuals throughout their country.  We obviously support the people to have a voice in every government throughout the world.
Q    And on the subject of partisanship and obstructionism, whose responsibility does the President feel it is to put an end to partisanship?  And who needs to be reaching out to whom collectively?
MR. SPICER:  I think it’s a two-way street.  I think part of it is that we -- the President and the First Lady extended an invitation the other night for everyone to come.  I think we were excited to see a third of Senate Democrats come.  I wish we had seen more.  There’s an opportunity I think to engage in a discussion about some of the issues and come together.  
But I would argue that when you look at this fight on Gorsuch, there are -- I don’t disagree with the fact that if you’re a Democrat you probably don’t necessarily agree with some of the rulings and some of the philosophies of Judge Gorsuch.  I get that.  But at the end of the day, they have always agreed -- in fact, in most cases, the filibuster has never been the norm.  It hasn’t.  And it is odd to see that these individuals who have -- it’s one thing to vote no; it’s one thing to say that we don’t agree.  But to now turn to filibustering or threatening to filibuster Senate -- unbelievably qualified people, and there is nobody that I’m aware of, even on the left, that is suggesting that Judge Gorsuch isn’t qualified to serve as a Supreme Court justice.
Republicans in the past have allowed Democrat Presidents to have their nominees voted on up or down, and for the most part, when you go back to President Obama, President Clinton, they have been -- Republicans have joined with Democrats to allow people who are qualified to go onto the Court.  And to see this new precedent be formed by Leader Schumer is disappointing because this is a huge, huge crack.  I think there was a column -- one of the papers today I think -- you are really fundamentally changing how the Senate is going to operate by doing this.  
And I think that’s an important -- they can disagree with him philosophically, I get that.  But when you have an election you can assume that a Republican President is going to choose Republicans for appointments and for federal judgeships, and the Democrats will do the same with their time in office.  
But it was Obama’s nominees that got through, all with Republican support.  And it’s difficult to understand why when you’ve got someone as eminently qualified as Gorsuch, that this is the state that they want to drive.  And I think it further sets a partisan divide in our country when we can’t allow people who are qualified and universally so to get on the bench.
Q    Should it not be done from the President’s side to try to --
MR. SPICER:  I think so, sure.  But I think it’s a two-way street.  I would ask you what is -- I remember a few years ago there was all this talk about, from the get-go, of Obama -- Democrats [sic] made hay about how they wanted to see him as a one-term President.  I’ve seen a similar tactic from Democrats now about how they want to defeat him, they want to stop his agenda, and there’s no sense of them wanting to work with this President.
So at some point, I think we have shown a willingness to bring them together.  It’s amazing how many senators, when you talk to them over the course of the last almost 70 days, have said, you know, I’ve been to the White House more in the last 70 days of a Trump administration than I was during eight years of an Obama administration.  And I think that that speaks to the President’s desire to bring people together and to find common ground on areas of mutual agreement where we can move the country forward.
Thank you.  I’ll see you tomorrow.  
END 
Daily Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer -- #33
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 

1:40 P.M. EDT

MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon.  First off, I want to catch everyone up who wasn’t able to make the briefing last night on the executive orders on the trade -- executive orders that the President is going to be signing this afternoon.
The first order directs the Department of Commerce and the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative to examine every form of trade abuse and non-reciprocal practice that are currently contributing to the United States’ large and persistent trade deficit, which was the largest of any major nation in 2016 at $500 billion.
Within 90 days, the Department of Commerce and U.S. Trade Representative will submit a comprehensive report to the President on the causes of our unduly large deficit.  It’s the first time in modern history that an American President has called for such an investigation, and its -- our findings will allow us to make smarter decisions on behalf of the American people about our trade policy of our country going forward.
That’s why the AFL-CIO, United Steelworkers International, the International Association of Machinists and the Aerospace Workers International all came out today to applaud the order.
The second order addresses the current lack of enforcement of one of our strongest tools in fighting unfair trade practices -- countervailing duties.  Countervailing duties were put in place to address the problem of other countries dumping undervalued goods into American markets, making it impossible for American businesses to compete with artificially low prices.
This is especially a problem in countries whose governments subsidize exports into our country.  So to discourage this practice, the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Agency has a mechanism for assessing these type of transactions and imposing financial penalties, known as countervailing duties, when it’s determined that this kind of malicious dumping has occurred.
Since 2001, the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Agency has not collected over $2.8 billion in these duties.  If you think about it, we could do a lot by maximizing this enforcement power for our country.  So we need to do a better job on behalf of the American worker.  If a foreign company, often due to its being partly or entirely government-run or subsidized, is able to flood American markets with an artificially cheap steel, for example, they price American companies out of the system.
Say you’re the owner of a steel company in Ohio.  You can’t compete with some of these below-market prices.  So you have to find other ways to meet your bottom line, like closing a factory and laying off workers, or might entirely having to close down entirely. 
By not properly using this enforcement mechanism we’re costing Americans who work in so many industries -- not just steel, but in agriculture, chemicals, machinery, and other manufactured good in particular
President Trump was elected to do everything he can to support American workers and American manufacturers.  Together, these two executive orders are a significant step in accomplishing the President’s promise to end unfair trade practices once and for all.
Also, yesterday, we were pleased to see that Senators Manchin of West Virginia and Heitkamp announce their support for Judge Neil Gorsuch.  And Senator Claire McCaskill conceded at a private event that among the list of potential nominees that the President released during a campaign, Judge Gorsuch was -- according to her, quote -- “one of the better ones.”  We hope that her praise leads to additional support -- and her support.
It’s hard to find any reason except for obstructionism to see why fellow Democrats in her caucus have not been able to join them. 
As I said yesterday, Judge Gorsuch is highly regarded, having received a rating of “well qualified” from the American Bar Association, and has demonstrated an unparalleled and unprecedented level of transparency, including the release of over 75,000 pages of documents, fielding nearly 300 questions from Senate Democrats on the committee, and 70 pages of written answers about his personal records, and has demonstrated a mainstream judicial record -- with nearly all of the decisions being joined by Democrat-appointed judges.
Without a clear justification, Senate Democrats have fudged the facts on recent history, to try to mislead the American people about their unprecedented obstructionism, essentially claiming a non-existent 60-vote standard.  As I’ve said before, should Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer get his way, this would be the first successful filibuster of a nominee to join the Supreme Court.  This would make history in a very bad way.
They’ve also forgotten their own words.  I’ve cited previously this week the rhetoric of Senator Schumer, Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton, the regrets of invoking the filibuster by Senator -- President Obama, then Senator Obama, and the words of many other Senate Democrats, like Senator McCaskill, on why blocking a vote for a judge having gone through the process has no precedent and is irresponsible.  Let me cite one more argument that many Senate Democrats have recently made. 
Current members of the Senate seem to also reject the notion of a Supreme Court operating with eight, not nine, justices.  These include Senators Schumer, Dick Durbin, Bernie Sanders, Dianne Feinstein, Jeanne Shaheen, Richard Blumenthal, Amy Klobuchar, Ben Cardin and Martin Heinrich.  Each of these Senate Democrats and the rest of their fellow caucus members need not listen to me or the President, but their own words as recently as last year.  
The President told the American people in his Weekly Address that was launched earlier today why it is.  And again, we call on Senate Democrats to end this unnecessary obstruction and confirm an imminently qualified jurist to the bench.
Also last night, the Department of Justice filed an appeal in the 9th Circuit to Hawaii’s federal judge’s preliminary injunction against the President’s lawful and necessary executive order dealing with protecting this country.  
Moving on to some of the events of today.  This morning, the President met with former Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice.  They had an opportunity to talk about regional threats, current affairs hotspots, our attempt to defeat ISIS, and many more areas.  It was a great meeting where they discussed many of the challenges facing our country.  And the President sought the former Secretary of State and National Security Advisor’s advice and opinions on a variety of subjects.  
He also signed House Joint Resolution 42, allowing states to drug test unemployment insurance claims, and H.R. 1362, naming a VA outpatient clinic in Pago Pago, American Samoa.
Also this morning, the President joined Jay Timmons, President of the National Association of Manufacturers, and some of its member CEOs to unveil the Association’s annual Manufacturers’ Outlook Survey.  An incredible 93 percent of manufacturers surveyed by the National Association of Manufacturers now have a positive outlook for the future.  That's a 20-year record high that’s more than 35 points higher than that same rating was last year.
To quote from the survey itself, “The rising confidence stems from the belief that the new administration in Washington, D.C. will bring much needed regulatory relief, as well as reforms to the tax code and a significant infrastructure package.”
The optimism is evident across the spectrum of indicators.  The Dow Jones Industrial Average is up over 12 percent since Election Day.  The National Association of Home Builders Confidence Index is at its highest level in 12 years.  The Gallup Small Business Index shows that small business owners are the most optimistic they’ve been since 2007.
It’s not surprising that American industry is reacting in this way.  The President has taken immediate steps to make it easier to do business in this country.  And we are just at the beginning of this process.  On top of the significant steps taken in the executive orders this morning, he’s also withdrawn from the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement, cleared the way for the Keystone XL and Dakota Access pipelines, began a much needed government-wide reform of our regulatory and permitting processes, and signed legislation preventing the burdensome streamline -- “Stream Protection Rule” from causing further harm to America’s coal industry.
The President was glad to see this report add to the list of measurements reflecting the incredible optimism and positivity that his pro-growth policies have created.
Back to this afternoon.  The President will meet with the Director of the National Institutes of Health before signing the aforementioned executive orders on trade at 3:30 p.m.  And he will meet with Director of the Office of Management and Budget Mick Mulvaney.
In Cabinet news today, the Secretary of State, Rex Tillerson, is in Brussels, attending the NATO Foreign Ministers Meeting.  There, he reaffirmed the Trump administration's steadfast commitment to NATO.  Secretary Tillerson also stressed the need for all member countries to meet their defense spending commitments, as well as the need for NATO to take a larger role in the fight against terrorism and ISIS.  
The President looks forward to meeting with his NATO counterparts in Brussels this May to reaffirm the United States' commitment to NATO and to discuss ways to strengthen the alliance in order to cope with challenges in national and international security.
This morning, the Office of the United States Trade Representative released the 2017 National Trade Estimate. The annual report, which is required by law, surveys the significant barriers faced by American exporters.  Its findings reinforce the need for the President’s “America First” trade agenda, which prioritizes the enforcement of the trade laws to protect American workers and job creators.  The President looks forward to having Ambassador Lighthizer in place as the USTR so that he can begin his important work in earnest and fulfill the mission of this report.
And Transportation Secretary Chao -- who, yesterday, celebrated the 50th birthday of the Department of Transportation -- today directed the Federal Highway Administration officials to award $10 million in Emergency Relief funds to help begin repairs on Atlanta’s collapsed I-85 Overpass.  Releasing these funds will quickly help to ensure that the bridge is repaired safely and in a timely manner.
The White House Office of Intergovernmental Affairs has already talked with the Georgia Governor’s team and Secretary Chao has spoken with the Governor.
Looking forward -- as promised, today we will be releasing the U.S. OGE Form 378 financial reports as filed by commissioned officers here in the White House.  Right after I’m done here we’ll have a background briefing with Senior White House compliance and ethics officers to walk you through how that process is going to go and the public release of that information, which will occur later this evening.  We'll be sure to update you if there’s anything further to add.
This weekend, the President will be here in the White House holding meetings.  We’ll be sure to update you if there’s anything further to add.  
And on Sunday, the White House will honor World Autism Awareness Day by lighting the White House in blue to join with the autism awareness community.  Further research into the causes and treatments for autism spectrum disorders is one of the President’s priorities.  As we light it blue on Sunday, the White House will be celebrating all of the individuals and families whose lives are impacted by autism.
I would note that it's a really interesting story how this came to be.  The head of Autism Speaks, an organization that has done tremendous work with this, Bob Wright is one of the cofounders -- is a longtime friend of the President.  His wife, Suzanne, was struggling with pancreatic cancer last year.  And the President made a pledge to her.  He said, if I'm elected President, in supporting this cause that you care so deeply about, I will light the White House blue.  So it is in Suzanne and Bob Wright’s honor that this will occur for this great cause.  And I hope Bob knows that Suzanne is looking down proudly to see that that pledge has been fulfilled.
With that, I'll be glad to take your questions.  
John Roberts.
Q    Sean, a couple of questions, if I could, about Chairman Nunes’s visit to the White House.  Fox News has been told by intelligence officials that Chairman Nunes is aware of who did the unmasking of certain individuals in the transition and may be aware of who ordered the unmasking of those individuals.  Is the White House aware of that information?
MR. SPICER:  I don't know what he knows, in the sense that that's -- and again, I've tried to make it a comment not to get into the specifics of that report. 
I will not -- I think it’s not in our interest to talk about the process.  What occurred between Chairman Nunes in coming here was both routine and proper.  Chairman Nunes and Ranking Member Schiff, who I understand is expected here later today, both possess the appropriate credentials and clearances.
We've invited Democrats here, and I’ve been told that material they will see will shed light on the investigation.  I know a lot of folks want to talk about the process and not the surveillance and the underlying issue of the substance -- the unmasking and leaks is what we should all be concerned about.  
It affects all Americans, our liberties, our freedom, our civil liberties.  So let’s talk about some of the substance.  
And I know that's not -- but on March 2nd, day before the President’s tweet, comments by a senior administration official, foreign policy expert, Dr. Evelyn Farkas, together with previous reports that have been out, raised serious concerns on whether or not there was an organized and widespread effort by the Obama administration to use and leak highly sensitive intelligence information for political purposes.  She admitted this on television by saying:  “I was urging my former colleagues, frankly speaking, the people on the Hill; I was telling people on the Hill, get as much information as you can, get as much intelligence as you can.  I had a fear that they were essentially watching the Trump staff, and he was worried about the Trump administration.”
That's what’s out there.  And I know NBC News has just reported something very similar about information that was used by the Obama White House to spread this information -- this politically sensitive information.  
Dr. Farkas’s admissions alone are devastating.  On March 4th, the President -- as you all know -- raised serious questions about surveillance practices by the Obama administration, including whether or not the President-elect or the transition team members were being improperly monitored for political purposes under the Obama administration.
Later in March, in the ordinary course of their work, NSC  -- National Security Council staff discovered information that may support the questions raised by the President and Dr. Farkas’s claim.  These are serious issues.  They raise serious concerns.  And if true, the issues would be devastating. 
We're committed to working with the House and Senate committees, as we've said multiple times, to get to the bottom of what happened here, why it happened, and who was involved.
For this reason, we're in the process of ensuring that the reports that the NSC staff discovered in the normal course of business are made available to those committees investigating to ensure that all of the facts come to light.  And if everyone was treating the President and the administration fairly, you’d ask a series of much different questions about the substance than the materials.  
As we've said before, when you talk about Russia in particular, everyone who has been briefed on this subject from Republican, to Democrat, to CIA, former Obama administration’s Clapper, Brennan, you name it -- all of the people come back with the same conclusion -- and I think that is important -- that there has been no evidence of the President’s campaign and Russian officials.
In fact, as you've heard me state before, it was Hillary Clinton who was the architect of the last administration’s failed reset policy.  She told Russian state TV that it was designed to strengthen Russia.  That was their goal:  to strengthen Russia.  She used her office to make concession after concession, selling off one-fifth of our country’s uranium, paid speeches, paid deals, getting personal calls from Vladimir Putin. 
I think if there’s -- you really want to talk about a Russian connection and the substance, that's where we should be looking.  That -- not there.  
Q    I wasn’t expecting to tap quite such a deep well with that question.  (Laughter.) 
MR. SPICER:  It’s Friday.
Q    Intelligence officials also tell us that Chairman Nunes knew about the documents that he viewed at the White House back in January, but ended up looking at them at the NSC SCIF only because he could not get access to those same documents through some of the other intelligence agencies.  Basically it was a last resort to come here to the White House to view them.  Do you know if that is the case?
MR. SPICER:  I don't.  But I do think that it tracks everything that's been -- I saw a couple tweets the other day that I mentioned where people were saying that the NSA was trying to get documents.  From a narrative of what’s been out there -- and again, we have tried to be very careful about this and tried to be consistent about how we want this handled.  But everything that he has said -- when he came out initially and talked to the media, he made it very clear that he had been looking into this.  He had stated this much earlier than the President ever had raised this issue about surveillance and the unmasking of individuals for areas that had nothing to do with Russia and nothing to do with substantive intelligence surveillance.
So I think that as we continue down this path, if you actually begin to focus really on the substance, I think we see more and more a very, very troubling and devastating path.
Q    And just one more thing to clear up on process, if I could.  We're also being told by intelligence officials that the two individuals who were identified yesterday -- Ezra Cohen-Watnick and Michael Ellis -- were not the source for the information, for the intelligence chairman.  They did play an ancillary role in terms of finding some extra evidence here at the White House and helping to sign him in so that he could view the intelligence.  Do you know if that's true?
MR. SPICER:  Again, John, I’m not -- if I start commenting on every one of these stories, I can't -- that's not our practice.  Again, part of it is that if we confirm some things and not others we’re going to go down a very slippery slope.  
I can say that we’ve continued to say that this is -- I think the substance of this matter and what continues to come to light in terms of Obama officials admitting either off the record or, frankly, on the record, consistent with what Dr. Farkas says, that there was clearly an attempt to do something politically motivated with the intelligence out there.  And the question is why?  Who else did it?  Was it ordered?  By whom?
But I think more and more, the substance that continues to come out on the record by individuals continues to point to exactly what the President was talking about that day on March 5th.
Jonathan.
Q    Sean, we heard from the President this morning saying that Mike Flynn should ask for immunity.  We also know the President has longstanding views on what immunity means.  Back in September he said, “If you aren't guilty of a crime, what do you need immunity for?”  So does the President think that Mike Flynn is guilty of a crime?
MR. SPICER:  I think he believes that Mike Flynn should go testify.  He thinks that he should go up there and do what he has to do to get the story out.
Q    With or without immunity?  
MR. SPICER:  That’s up to him and his lawyer to decide.  I’m not going to give Mike Flynn or anyone else legal advice from the podium, but I will tell you that the President’s view is he should go up there, he should testify.  
Q    But the President gave legal advice from his Twitter account.  He said Mike Flynn should ask for immunity.
MR. SPICER:  Right, I understand.
Q    And he has said in the past that the only reason you ask for immunity if you committed a crime.  
MR. SPICER:  Right, but I think the underlying point that you’re missing, Jonathan, respectfully, is that what he’s asking is, go testify, go get it out there, do what you have to do to get there and tell Congress and tell everyone exactly what we’ve been saying for a long time.
So I mean, again -- I get your point.  But I think that the interesting thing is you actually stop for a second and realize what the President is doing is that he’s saying, do whatever you have to do, to go up to make it clear what happened, take whatever precaution you want or however your legal counsel advises you.
But again, I’ve heard in some legal circles that the President could have exerted legal authority with him and Sally Yates and others.  It’s quite the opposite.  And again, I think that that, compared to the narrative that you hear from a lot of the folks in this room all the time is a little bit opposite.  Here you have a President who is telling Mike Flynn and others to go up there, make sure -- in fact, we talked about the other day with members of the administration that the President -- we’ve made -- volunteered -- this doesn’t look like an administration that is not doing everything it can to get to the bottom of this in the appropriate way.  
And I think that that is an important distinction that has been lost on a lot of you, that every action that we have taken -- we’ve got up here and we’ve talked about Russia and the lack of a connection.  We’ve talked about the fact that every single person who’s been briefed has come away saying none exists -- Republican, Democrat, Obama appointee, et cetera.
And yet, at the end of the day, the narrative still comes at us.  And now, we’re going to the point where we’ve actually encouraged people to go talk to the House and Senate Intelligence Committee and the appropriate investigators so that they can continue to get to the bottom of this and get it aside from us.  I think that’s quite the opposite of what you would normally think that somebody who was not trying to get to the bottom would do.
Eamon.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  One on taxes and one on trade, if I could.  Back on February 9th, the President said the he would be presenting a phenomenal tax plan in the next two or three weeks.  Tomorrow is April 1st; we haven’t seen that tax plan.  Can you tell us when the President is going to present his plan?
MR. SPICER:  I think, as you noticed -- yesterday Secretary Mnuchin and Gary Cohn and others on the team talked to the President about the process, and I think that we are working on engaging with key stakeholders.  And when we feel it’s appropriate that the President is given the appropriate amount of feedback, we’ll start to put out the appropriate outline and process that we envision.
But at this time, that discussion is ongoing.  We recognize, as you know -- we anticipated fully being engulfed in healthcare right now.  And I think that we’re accelerating that.  The President has got his team working overtime.  He’s been giving them feedback as far as what he wants to see and how he wants to see it.  But this is a big task.  It’s taken 30 years and we’re going to get to it.
Q    Is the White House going to write its own proposal here, or is this going to be like the healthcare debate where we thought we were going to see a proposal from the White House, but in the end the President sort of signed on to Paul Ryan’s plan?  
MR. SPICER:  First, I would dispute that we signed on to someone’s plan.  We worked with the House -- as you know, from the President’s statements, we were very on board.  I would suggest to you to say that we signed on to a plan -- it was a work that both sides worked together on.  We worked with the Senate as well.  And I think this plan -- I would assume that hopefully we come up with a plan that we all agree on.  
The President will put out principles, I’m sure, as we’ve already done, in terms of what his goals are and how he wants to drive this as the process moves forward.  But I’m sure that we’re going to have a robust debate about aspects of that plan, certain provisions and certain other tax pieces.  But we’re going to work with the House and the Senate on it.
Q    And on trade, the President, during the campaign -- he’s now gearing up for this meeting with the Chinese President at Mar-a-Lago.  During the campaign, he suggested that on day one, he would declare China a currency manipulator.  He hasn’t done that.  Why hasn’t the President followed through on that campaign promise?
MR. SPICER:  I think we need to have that meeting with President Xi.  I’m sure that there will be a lot of discussions about our economic relationship.  And so I don’t -- we are days away from that, and let’s see what those -- I just don’t want to prejudge -- we’re days away from it, and I know there’s a lot of issues that need to come up and I don’t want to get in front of it.
Olivier.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Two, if I may.  One on China, one on the Middle East.  Does the administration plan to order a review into China’s status as a nonmarket economy?
MR. SPICER:  At this time the two trade executive orders that focus on countervailing duties and -- are where we’re going to look.  I think we’ve got a lot -- obviously that’s an issue that we would probably hope to have the U.S. trade representative confirmed.  But that’s a combined decision I think that in consultation with the Department of Commerce and the Department of Treasury.
But let’s see how we go first.
Q    And then can you clear up where the President stands on whether Bashar Assad is the legitimate President of Syria?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think with respect to Assad, there is a political reality that we have to accept in terms of where we are right now.  We lost a lot of opportunity the last administration with respect to Assad.  And I think that our statement that both U.N. Ambassador Haley gave yesterday and Secretary of State Tillerson reflects the reality that it's now up to the Syrian people.
We had an opportunity and we need to focus on now defeating ISIS.  But the United States has profound priorities in Syria and Iraq, and we made it clear that counterterrorism, particularly the defeat of ISIS, is foremost among those priorities.  And that’s why our forces in the global coalition are partnering with local forces against ISIS in Iraq and Syria.
But I mean -- I think there is a bit of political reality with respect to where we are now versus where we were the last administration in terms of there being a potential -- there is not the opposition that existed last time and the opportunities that existed last time.
Q    It sounds like you’re saying whether or not he’s legitimate -- if you were to declare him illegitimate there’s nothing the United States could do about that, so there’s no point in -- 
MR. SPICER:  I think there is a bit of reality that has to be addressed with respect to the opportunity and the options that we have now that we don’t have or didn’t have -- they had in the last administration.  And there is a reality that just doesn’t exist in the same way.
Jon-Christopher.
Q    Thank you.  What’s really the end game for Mr. Assad when the President speaks to his allies, his NATO partners?  Obviously Assad is not going to retire somewhere in the south of France.  Something has got to give.  What is the thought there?  What is the disposition, the conversation in terms of Assad, who is very close to Mr. Putin and would like to have a warm water port in the Mediterranean?
MR. SPICER:  I think we believe there’s a need to deescalate violence and to have a political process through which Syrians will decide their own political future consistent with the principles that have been enshrined in U.N. Security Council Resolution 2254.  But there’s a bit of -- as I mentioned just a second ago, there’s a bit of reality on the ground in terms of what the options are.
Q    During the presidential campaign the President said he was with the state on North Carolina’s law banning transgender people from using certain restrooms.  The Democratic governor yesterday signed a deal to replace that law with a measure that civil rights groups still say is discriminatory.  Does the President support this law?
MR. SPICER:  I have not asked the President.  I would say consistent with what he said during the campaign cycle he believes in states’ rights, so --
Q    -- different issue, but what is the President’s personal view on bathrooms for transgender people and the way states should approach it?
MR. SPICER:  I think that the President has made it clear  -- this issue came up when Caitlyn Jenner in particular came to Trump Tower and he said he didn’t really care.  But I think it is a state and local issue, not one that he believes needs federal attention.  
Matt.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Given that it’s financial disclosure day, why will the White House not be releasing --
MR. SPICER:  -- proclamation on that.  (Laughter.)  
Q    Why won’t the White House not be releasing the President’s 2016 tax returns, given, conceivably, those can’t be under audit yet while the audit has obviously been the reason for why you haven’t released those past returns?
MR. SPICER:  I mean, look, asked and -- I mean, the President has been very clear about his tax returns and his position on that.  The Office of Government Ethics requires every federal employee at a certain level to file these financial disclosure forms, that anyone in America can go on to -- it will be the first time, I believe -- and I don’t want to get ahead of the background briefing to give away the good stuff -- but I believe that this is the first time that they’re on the White House website.  We are making them more accessible, more available than in history.
Q    So then why not make this step --
MR. SPICER:  I think that’s apples and oranges.  These are required by law.  These lists -- just for everyone who’s not familiar with them, the financial disclosure forms that we file -- I think it’s called a 278 -- reveal every asset you own, every debt that you have, your spouse’s income, your spouse’s employment, holdings that you have, credit card debt, other -- I mean, it is a fairly comprehensive undertaking of every asset that a person owns, every debt that they have.
And I think that that is a very clear understanding of the assets that people have, the value of those assets, both in terms of whether they’re worth something or the liabilities that they’re incurring.  That is a very, very transparent way of being able to understand someone’s -- and so to equate the two is rather --
Q    Sure, I just was using that as a jumping-off point for the tax returns question.  
MR. SPICER:  Well, I’ll jump back.
Q    If the audit is not the reason for the returns --
MR. SPICER:  I didn’t say --
Q    -- because there can’t be an audit of --
MR. SPICER:  Right, but you’ll also remember that taxes aren’t due until the 15th of April.
Q    So can we expect them on the 15th of April?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know.  I’m not -- I don’t know.  I haven’t really gotten into -- I’m worried about getting my own done.  But I’ll --
Q    Are you going to release them?
MR. SPICER:  No.  (Laughter.)  But I think that -- again, I think that, respectfully, you look at what we’re doing, frankly -- and again, this will be discussed after this is done -- but I think there is an element of going above and beyond what has been done in the past to make sure that people have access to this.  There is a lot of people -- I think one of the really interesting things that people are going to see today -- and I think it’s something that should be celebrated -- is that the President has brought a lot of people into this administration, and this White House in particular, who have been very blessed and very successful by this country, and have given up a lot to come into government by setting aside a lot of assets.  And I think it speaks volumes to the desire for a lot of these people to fulfill the President’s vision and move the agenda forward that they are willing to list all of their assets, undergo this public scrutiny, but also set aside a lot.  
Because you’ll see that people are often told they have to sell an asset or get rid of something to come serve in the government.  And there’s a lot of people that have done a lot to come into this administration to give back, that have been inspired by the President’s victory and the President’s agenda to move the country forward.
Jim.
Q    General Flynn’s attorney said that his client has a “story to tell.”  Is the White House concerned that General Flynn has damaging information about the President, his aides, his associates about what occurred during the campaign with respect to Russia?
MR. SPICER:  Nope.
Q    Okay.  The other thing I wanted to ask you, to follow up on that, is, you were just saying a few moments ago that some of this information that would be helpful to the committee -- you were talking about Evelyn Farkas and so forth -- that seems to be something that pertains to during the transition.  But the President’s tweets time and again talked about “tapping my phones” in October just prior to the election.  “Just found out Obama had my wires tapped in Trump Tower just before the victory.”
I’m just kind of -- I want to get something clear about the time frame.  Does the White House have any information -- is it providing any information to these Intelligence Committees that would draw these members to the conclusion that there was some kind of surveillance going on before the election as the President originally alleged?
MR. SPICER:  So again, I don't want to specifically get in -- but I think if we're splitting hairs about what day of the calendar it was, that's a pretty interesting development.  I think that we have now come to a place where I think that we can -- 
Q    The President’s allegations -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  But if the allegation is, well, it was actually on the 1st of December or the 10th of December versus the 31st of October, I think that we're starting to split some serious hairs here.
The idea that -- and again, I just -- it’s interesting that now we're arguing over the date, not the substance.  And the substance is why were people using government resources, violating civil liberties, potentially -- looking into people’s backgrounds to surveil them, to understand what they were doing, and who they were, to unmask them, provide their names to sources; spread classified information, make it available to others, spread it to places that they weren’t supposed to use it -- 
Q    Then -- 
MR. SPICER:  But, hold on, let me just -- I think that it is interesting.  Because again, I get your question.  But if what we're really arguing is did it happen on a Monday or a Tuesday, or did it happen on the 31st versus the 7th or the 8th, I think we've lost focus here.  There is -- 
Q    But you started off as allegations -- 
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  I’ll answer.  Just let me finish -- 
Q    -- surveillance and -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.
Q    -- not that the dates are changing.  
MR. SPICER:  No, no, they're not.  I didn't say they were changing.  Just to be clear.  I’m just saying that it is -- it is fascinating to me that we are now arguing over the date, not the substance.
I understand your point.  And if we get down to that, we come out and you really want to get into what date -- because I think it is really getting lost in the debate that American citizens who were not government employees at the time, who were not targets of stuff potentially were surveilled, had their information unmasked, made it available, was politically spread.  And all of this should be very concerning to people that an administration or people in an administration, people serving in government who are provided classified information, who are given clearance in the trust of the United States government misused, mishandled, and potentially did some very, very bad things with classified information.  
That astonishes me that that is not the subject of this; that all of this is happening in our country, and yet the subject -- and again, we talk about what door someone came in, what date it happened -- there is a concern that people misused, mishandled, misdirected classified information, leaked it out, spread it out, violated civil liberties.  And the potential that that happened should concern every single American.
Q    And to follow up on that, I think we are concerned about the substance just as much as the process.  But the details matter.  But I just want to make sure -- you clearly -- because it seems like you're going farther than what we've heard in previous briefings.  It sounds like you are, just as the President is, alleging that the Obama administration conducted unlawful surveillance on the Trump campaign and Trump transition team.
MR. SPICER:  What I am saying very clearly is that as -- 
Q    Do you have evidence of that?
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, I don't.  I know that what has been provided to -- as I said in the statement, I believe that what has been provided and will be provided to members of both committees I think should further their investigation.  I think that the revelations of Evelyn Farkas, who played a senior role in the Obama administration, going on the record to talk about how they politically used classified information is troubling.
I believe that the reports that are coming out day by day that NBC has just reported, that John just detailed what Fox has reported -- day by day, more and more, we are seeing that the substance of what we've been talking about continues to move exactly in the direction that the President spoke about in terms of surveillance that occurred.  And that should be very troubling.  That, frankly, should be something that everyone looks at and says, what’s going on here?  Why did it happen?  Who did it?  And how are we going to get to the bottom of it?  That's what concerns me.
Steve Holland.
Q    Can I go back to China for a second?  The President yesterday said that the meeting next week with China will be a difficult one, and he referred to massive trade deficits.  Now what sort of tone is he hoping to set for this meeting?  
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think he’s been very clear -- 
Q    Why is it going to be so difficult?
MR. SPICER:  Why is what? 
Q    Why is it going to be so difficult, as he says?
MR. SPICER:  Why -- there’s big issues.  I don't think it’s a surprise to anybody in terms of -- we've got both national security issues in terms of our political posture towards North Korea, the threat of a missile that extends further and further, the tests that they're using, their nuclear capability.  Those should all be very concerning.
And then on the trade front, we've got serious concerns with what they're doing, our trade practices with them, some of the things that were mentioned in the past.  But there’s a lot of areas that we need to be concerned about with trade.  And I think that -- this isn’t a sit around and play patty-cake kind of conversation.  They're big issues.  The President has been making it very clear since -- for decades, frankly, of the challenges that we face.  And I think he wants to have a very good and respectful and healthy relationship.  But he also wants to make sure that he tackles the challenges and the problems that are facing American workers and American manufacturers and get to them.
I’m going to go to my first seat, and then Glenn because he’s patient.  First Skype seat, Maurice Goodman, from WWDB-AM in Philly.  So shout out to Hallie’s old stations.  
Q    In Philadelphia.  It’s Randall Jefferson.  The question is:  President Trump signed an executive order that he intends to not fund cities that refuse to share immigration status information.  Attorney General Sessions recently suggested that cities could not only lose future funds but that the federal government may require them to pay back grants.  Will there be a -- when and will -- when will this take place?  And will that money be reallocated to other departments like the Department of Education or HBCUs? 
MR. SPICER:  Well, I’m not -- I would say that the President finds it unacceptable that some localities and counties and potentially some states have prioritized a political agenda over the safety of their people by flouting our nation’s immigration laws, becoming so-called sanctuary cities. 
The failure to follow federal law can have tragic consequences for all of our citizens and all of our country.  It’s particularly concerning in a place like Chicago and other cities like yours in Philadelphia where there’s been increased violence.  Immigrants both legal and illegal are not safe from criminals who have committed egregious acts are free to roam the streets. 
And the Attorney General has issued a public notice reminding all states and local jurisdictions of their responsibilities to comply with federal laws. 
With respect to the budget piece, I think we've had an ongoing budget process, and we’ll have to see how many states comply and where, if any, potential savings are there and then how we allocate them.  But I think the President’s budget -- both his FY17 contingency budget for funding beyond this continuing resolution on April 28th, and then his FY18 budget that he’s already submitted -- are going to reflect some key priorities both in terms of homeland security and national defense. 
So we’ll see where we would reallocate any of that money, but I think the priority is clear is to get cities into compliance and to make sure that we understand there’s not just a financial impact to this but also a very clear security aspect of this.
Glenn.
Q    Two things, Sean.  First, just to follow up on something you said before.  You said that Hillary Clinton had personal contact with Vladimir Putin, and the suggestion was that wasn’t necessarily appropriate.  Can you just elaborate what you were --
MR. SPICER:  Oh, no, I’m not saying that’s -- the contact in itself is not appropriate -- is not --
Q    I mean, as a private citizen or as a --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no.  I think what I’m saying is that when you talk about connections to Russia, I think the only connection that anyone has made with President Trump is multiple years ago he hosted a pageant there and he’s -- some of the -- he owns condos around the world and some of them were sold to some Russians, and I think he sold a house to one several years back.  That’s his connection.
When you talk about the other side, you look at what the Obama administration’s connections were.  You have a Secretary of State that was selling a fifth of our country’s uranium.  You have a Clinton Foundation concern with some of the donations they got.  You’ve got the former President, her husband, giving paid speeches, getting a personal call from Vladimir Putin.  You’ve got a stated goal of that administration, of Secretary Clinton to have a reset to “strengthen Russia.”
So when you compare the two sides in terms of who’s actually engaging with Russia, trying to strengthen them, trying to act with them, trying to interact with them, it is night and day between our actions and her actions and yet no one questioned what she was doing or how she was handling it, and yet --
Q    So you think that her pattern of behavior is more suspicious than President Trump’s pattern of behavior?
MR. SPICER:  I think that if you compare the two it’s definitely -- when you talk about the stuff that went to their foundation, the concerns that existed around the sale of one-fifth of all the country’s uranium, the paid speeches, the personal calls from Vladimir Putin -- I think that when you want to look at a connection to Russia there is a clear one there, and much less of one that ever existed on this side.
Q    So, Sean, in terms of the Nunes chronology, just to clarify, when we’re asking questions about process like gates and people, we’re not attempting to ascertain the geography of the executive complex, we want to know who knew what and when.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.
Q    So my question is -- so I will ask that directly, forget about the technical questions.  Mr. Nunes was on the campus.  You say we don’t know who let him in the gate, so apparently it is -- and you described that, I believe, this is a normal process, right?  Tell me if it is normal the way that I’m describing it.  Mr. Nunes, the head of an investigatory committee, is allowed to roam around the executive complex -- we don’t know who let him in -- to speak to two deputy-level members of the National Security Council.  He is then allowed to see information.  He then obtains an appointment, from my understanding of the chronology, with the President of the United States to disgorge that information.  He then goes public with that information.  Then seven or so days later, you say it would be appropriate for everybody to come down here and look at it.  Is that a normal process?  
MR. SPICER:  Well, A, I would take issue with a number of the aspects of your chronology.  Number one, which you’re forgetting, is that initially he is the one that publicly said well before any of this came to light in terms of the President’s March 5th tweet that he was just looking into this whole matter.  He, according to John Roberts, his own reporting, just said that neither of those individuals as described in your paper’s reporting are accurate.  So I would dispute several of the pieces that -- and then as far as him roaming around the White House --
Q    Well, you won’t tell us who let him in, so we don’t know.
MR. SPICER:  No, I understand this, but you -- again, you jump to a ton of conclusions about -- and again, I love watching some of these shows where they jump to conclusions --
Q    -- several times prejudged the investigation as clearing the White House.   You said it twice at the podium today.  
MR. SPICER:  Right.
Q    So we’re not prejudging --
MR. SPICER:  What I’m saying is -- because I’m focused on the substance of this, Glenn.  
Q    Well, what --
MR. SPICER:  Right, and so where is any of the reporting been in your paper about Evelyn Farkas and her revelation that this is what they sought to do?  Where has been the reporting in your paper that NBC News just recently covered that other officials -- you seem to be really focused on who showed up where and what door they went in and how it happened.  
To answer your question, yes, it’s appropriate for a member of Congress to contact someone who has contacted him, according to some of these reports.  I don’t know the answer to that, but if you’re asking me is it appropriate for a member of Congress to come over here -- as Chairman Nunes has said himself, he wasn’t hiding or roaming, he was asked to come over here by an individual.  He came over, which happens daily.  He was asked to go somewhere, he went there.  He is cleared.  And nothing that is inappropriate other -- exactly the opposite.  What he did, what he saw, and who he met with was 100 percent proper.
Q    Did the Chief of Staff, who is, at my understanding, an exceptionally attentive gatekeeper to who comes in and out of the Oval Office, did the Chief of Staff know that he was on the campus?  Did he approve his --
MR. SPICER:  But remember, you’re -- okay, but you’re playing cute there.  You’re doing two things.  One is you’re talking about the Oval Office and the other one is the campus.  So, no, the Chief of Staff does not know every single person who’s on the 18 acres at any given time.  They are people who are appropriately either cleared or WAVEd through the system or are escorted on in some way, shape or form.  
No, we don’t track every single person who’s on the 18 acres.  Do we know, generally speaking, who’s in the Oval Office?  Not all the time, because people can go in.  But if there was a meeting -- in that case, we all sat back here, he made the announcement -- and again, you’re leaving out a key part.  He actually briefed the press before he told anyone.  We all found -- you, me, everyone else -- that he was coming down here after he held a press conference with your colleagues to say he was coming down here based on stuff that he had found that didn’t have to do with Russia that a whistle-blower source had given him.
Now, the other reporting that I’m hearing today is actually that the sources that you describe in your paper are not accurate.  And while I’m not going to comment on either, I think there is an assumption that everything -- and the chronology that we know is accurate -- which I don’t believe, from further reporting, that it is.
And I also believe that some of the comments that have come out publicly in terms of some of the Obama administration are conveniently left out of that discussion.  I think that that is interesting how no one seems to really cover the fact that in a -- senior Obama administration with high-level clearances talked about the spreading of classified information for political purposes and no one seems to care.
Q    But just to be clear, Mr. Pribus, Mr. Kushner, Mr. Bannon did not have knowledge of his being on the campus, having this interaction with --
MR. SPICER:  I don’t know.  Again, you asked two questions and you melded them together.  No one knew that he was coming to speak to the President.  He announced that on television during a press conference.  
Q    My understanding is that Dr. Farkas left the administration in 2015.  So why is what she said in 2017 relevant to something that allegedly happened in 2016?
MR. SPICER:  The question I would have for you is -- exactly, why is it -- what does - she says inner things -- I’m urging my colleagues, I’m urging it to get -- the Hill.  But it’s odd that the presumption seems to be why is it interesting.  Have you asked her?  
Q    No, you’re the one telling us to -- from you right now.
MR. SPICER:  No, you haven’t.  So she -- no, no, but she’s been on television talking about what she’s done, and you seem to have made no --
Q    I don’t believe everything I see on TV.  (Laughter.)  
MR. SPICER:  Well, neither do I, but I also -- I would assume that as a reporter that actually is interested in the story, a senior Obama administration official that handled Russia --
Q    Former.
Q    Former, in 2015.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, well, all Obama administration officials generally are --
Q    No, but she wasn’t there in 2016.  
MR. SPICER:  Thank you, I appreciate the timeline.  I’m well aware of when it was.  But my point is, is you seem to be rushing to her defense.  At some point, she came on -- she went on television and talked about actions that he and her colleagues took to spread classified information.  And instead of -- Jonathan, instead of defending her, it might be worth asking her what she’s talking about, who she spread it to, why she did it, was it appropriate, who cleared her to do it.  
Maybe those are questions you can ask instead of asking me to defend why a former Obama administration official is revealing stuff that should be extremely concerning.  So I’m going to go back to --
Q    Yeah, one other question, which is, are you more concerned about that or Russian interference in the presidential election?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think that there -- as an American citizen I’m very concerned about the fact that people potentially were sharing information about other Americans for political purposes and using classified information to do so and leaking it.  That should be concerning to everybody.
Q    So the Russian interference --
MR. SPICER:  No, that’s not what I said.  Please stop trying to -- it’s not --
Q    My question is which is worse?
MR. SPICER:  And I guess I don’t -- I mean, the answer is, I think if someone is interfering with our election, that’s not good.  I don’t think that someone revealing and leaking classified information is good either.  I’m not sure that you should have to choose.  I think that you can have outrage and concern for both, and I don’t think we should have to pick as an American whether or not -- which freedom we want to have undermined.  I think we should accept both of them.  
And so the idea that we should have to choose whether or not we want someone to interfere with our election or protect our civil liberties isn't one that we should want or that we should have questioned.
Alexis. 
Q    Can I just ask three basic kind of follow-up to questions.  You’ve used two phrases here today.  One is really pretty sensitive information and the other is classified information when you're talking about what the President believes was released.  Because you said yesterday that you, yourself, had not seen the information -- and that's my understanding of today -- are those terms interchangeable, or are they different in terms of what you know from the podium was released?
MR. SPICER:  So there’s actually a classification level.  There is certain sensitive information on individuals, while not classified, is considered stuff that the government protects.  Then there’s secret, there’s top secret, and -- without getting into it -- there’s a lot higher.
There are differences in classification levels.  So while you may not reveal a piece of classified information, what they call PII information, is sensitive information, according to the government standards.  So they are different.  Each of them has a different classification level. 
Q    But it's your understanding -- you’ve been told that the material that the President is sharing with the committees includes classified information as well as politically sensitive information -- that's your understanding?
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    All right.  Next question -- you said Congressman Schiff is coming today?
MR. SPICER:  That's my -- I know that he had -- I don't -- he has made contact and is trying to arrange a time.  
Q    And can you share with us who will be responsible for escorting him to the proper place, showing him the materials, walking him through it, letting him absorb it?  Is he bringing staff?  Can you just explain the --
MR. SPICER:  I don't know the answer to that question.  I know that they were arranging a time, et cetera.  I think it's going to -- a lot of it will detail who -- if he is requesting it.  I don't know the nature of -- I know that the request was made, and that's one that -- there’s follow-up with the staff at the staff level to determine all those things.
Q    The two that the President has wanted to share with the House and the Senate committees -- has it already been shared with the FBI or does the FBI already have the material?
MR. SPICER:  I don't know the answer to that.  Some of it  -- I don't know.  It's NSC -- NSC pulls materials from the various agencies, so where that all came from -- is it a single source, is it a combination of those -- I don't know the answer to that.
Q    Can you get the answer to that?
MR. SPICER:  I can ask.  Again, part of it is there’s a question of whether or not we have the ability or the release it.  And again, as much as I appreciate where it came from, I think, again, I go back to does it really matter?  Does it matter if it came from the CIA or the NSA, or another three-letter agency, or is the issue, Alexis, whether or not, as I've said before -- whether or not there is a concern about what that information is doing, who used it improperly, what possibly could have happened.  I mean, again, it's where it came from.
Q    What I'm asking is, the executive branch -- the FBI has a separate investigation.  I'm asking -- the President believes he has evidence that is germane to that investigation, as broad as Director Comey has described.
MR. SPICER:  Well, first of all, just so we're clear, the FBI’s investigation pertains specifically to, from what the Director said in open testimony, to Russia.  What the President’s -- this is not what I believe they are investigating or --
Q    I misunderstood.  I thought that the FBI also had broadened the investigation beyond just simply Russia.
MR. SPICER:  I don't know.  I'm not aware of that.
Q    If you could just find out --
MR. SPICER:  You can call the FBI.  I'm not going to call the FBI and ask them what their investigation is, and then you’ll write a story about how I called the FBI.
Q    I'm asking you a separate question.  Does the President believe that it is important for the FBI to have the information that he finds to be so egregiously offensive, that politically sensitive information was shared by the previous administration?  I'm asking you a really simple question.
MR. SPICER:  I don't -- no, it's not.  You think it's simple, but I think the reality is it depends where it came from, who can share it.  You're acting as though it's a very -- you're acting as though it's a very simple process.  It depends on the level of classification, who it came from, whether they have the authority to share it.  There’s a lot of things that go into this.  And I know that it sounds really easy; it's not.  And I think that there -- I know that a lot of times that just because it can get leaked out doesn’t mean it's being handled appropriately.  And I think there is a desire to make sure that this is done correctly and within the proper guidance of who has the authority to see the right things, and that all of the procedures are followed.  
That doesn’t mean we just get to, willy-nilly, pick stuff and send it around to whoever.  There is a reason that certain information is handled the way it is, so that we protect the methods and processes that are in accordance with the intelligence community.
John. 
Q    This morning, the Republican Chairman of the House Oversight Government Reform Committee, Jason Chaffetz of Utah, took issue with the President’s tweet.  He said he does not believe that the Russian investigation that's being conducted by the FBI, by the Senate Intelligence Committee, by the House Intelligence Committee is a witch hunt.  Why does the President believe it's a witch hunt?  He also said -- before I get your answer to that -- he also said that he doesn’t think it's proper for the President to sort of tweet out or comment on ongoing investigations.  Can you also touch on that as well?
MR. SPICER:  I think part of this sometimes comes down to who has access to what information and what they’re looking at.  So I don't know what he has seen or not seen, or whether it's appropriate.  But again, I think there’s a whole -- the reason that we've asked the House and Senate Intelligence Committees to look into this is to make sure that we get to the bottom of it in an appropriate, proper manner.  
Q    Commenting on an ongoing investigation, is that proper by the President?
MR. SPICER:  What ongoing?
Q    Well, there’s an investigation that's ongoing by the FBI right now.  There’s an ongoing investigation that's ongoing by the Senate Intelligence Committee.
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  And --
Q    Should he be commenting on that?
MR. SPICER:  And which comment are you referring to?
Q    The “witch hunt.”
MR. SPICER:  Right, but I think when you -- as I just said to Alexis, I think there’s a difference between the investigations that have been discussed about Russia that we've been very clear about and a discussion about whether something  -- as Devin Nunes has said very publicly, the information that he had with respect to surveillance during the 2016 election cycle had nothing to do with Russia.
So there’s this seeming assumption that -- what the President has talked about is very clear -- there is an ongoing pattern and more and more revelations that what we have seen is that something potentially was very, very bad that's happening and people were using classified information -- not with respect to Russia, but to surveil people during that cycle.  And that is adversely different.  
There is no -- as far as I know -- we've asked the House and the Senate Intelligence Committees to look into this whole matter -- there is no “investigation” that I'm aware of.
Q    You take issue with Jason Chaffetz’s --
MR. SPICER:  I don't -- I'll let him speak for himself.  My point is, though, there is obviously -- I believe Chairman Nunes and others who have looked into this and see the information are probably in a much better position to discuss the situation at hand and understand what’s happening.
I'm going to go to Edward Marshall from WBBM in Chicago.
Q    Actually, it's Derrick Blakley at WBBM in Chicago.  Thank you.  I have a question, and if at all possible, a follow-up as well.  Chicago gets about $12 million a year in law enforcement assistance from the federal government.  Would President Trump cut off those funds due to the sanctuary city status even though it would greatly hamper the police fight against street violence, something the President has repeatedly said troubles him greatly?
MR. SPICER:  I think that you -- it's interesting, you talk about street violence and then we cut off the funding for sanctuary cities.  I think it would be interesting to want to send more money to a city that is allowing people to come into the country who are breaking the law, who, in many cases, are committing crimes -- member of gangs.  And so you can't be a sanctuary city and at the same time seem to pretend or express concern about law enforcement or ask for more money when probably a number of the funds that you're using in the first place are going to law enforcement to handle the situation that you’ve created for yourself.  
I think the President’s belief on sanctuary cities is one shared by upwards of 80 percent of the American people that we shouldn’t be using American tax dollars to fund cities and counties and, in some cases, potentially states that are seeking to allow people who are not legally in this country, who potentially can do us harm, to get funding.
And so I think there’s no question -- it's not a question of what he will do.  His intentions have been very clear from the beginning.  I think it's vastly supported by the vast majority of the American people.  But I think that to suggest that somehow they’re not inextricably linked is a failure to fully appreciate the scenario. 
Q    Can I follow up?  Does that mean the President is more interested in deporting illegal immigrants than he is with putting shooters and killers in jail?
MR. SPICER:  No.  Because if a shooter or killer is here illegally and he’s in this country, then I think that -- again, I think, respectfully, you're delinking the two issues.  If you have people who are in this country illegally that are part of a gang, that are part of -- they’re committing -- a threat to public safety or committing a crime, then funding that activity and allowing that to fester is in itself a problem.  And so by not rooting that out in the first place is allowing the problem to continue and not exactly showing an attempt to solve it in the first place.
Blake.  
Q    Let me ask you about the two executive orders that are about to be signed.  Peter Navarro said this morning that they have nothing to do with the China trip next week.  So is it just purely coincidence that it's happening now and the President is set to meet with his counterpart in China next week?  Or is this somewhat setting the table for what might come next week?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think they are both broad-based.  I mean, countervailing duties is not something that's targeted at any specific country.  So I don't think that you could use that as some kind of indication of any one country.  I think we're giving up $2.8 billion a year and that's coming through our borders all across.  So that one.
And the other one specifically talks about every form of trade abuse and non-reciprocal practice that are currently contributing to our deficit.  So there’s a lot of countries that contribute to that, and I think a lot of times the trade agreements that we've made in some cases haven't been looked at or revived in a very long time.  And so for either one of them to be suggested at any particular country would be a misread of either one.
Q    You mentioned that the President has signaled his intention to withdraw from TPP, you’ve got Keystone, you’ve got these executive orders, a whole host of others.  The second executive order that's coming today talks about a -- or the first one -- a 90-day review.  
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    The one that's still outstanding is NAFTA and what the President wants to do with that.  So does that move the NAFTA timeline potentially back 90 days?  Does he want to see this 90-day review first before getting to NAFTA?
MR. SPICER:  I think the first thing he wants to do is get Robert Lighthizer confirmed as the next U.S. Trade Representative so that we can have someone at the helm of that agency to really shepherd the trade agenda and help with the priorities.
I know that Peter and Secretary Ross were here yesterday, and Secretary Ross and Secretary Mnuchin and others have been very involved in the trade agenda.  But we really need someone in the front of the ship to help us guide us through it.  And that review and others are part of that.
Major.
Q    Do you have a timeline? 
MR. SPICER:  I don't.  
Q    You frequently tell us to take the President’s tweets at face value and they speak for themselves.  So when the President says Mike Flynn should get immunity, is he suggesting to Congress that it grant immunity? 
MR. SPICER:  I think Mike Flynn and his legal counsel should do what’s appropriate for Mike Flynn.
Q    Right, but that is -- they cannot obtain immunity.  It must be granted --  
MR. SPICER:  Right, and again to your question --
Q    -- by Congress.  
MR. SPICER:  Right. 
Q    You have the President recommending either to the FBI or to Congress that it grant immunity.  Because that's the only way it can happen.
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  But again, he didn't say Congress should grant, and I think -- 
Q    That's what I’m asking.  What does he mean by that?
MR. SPICER:  And I think that his -- what he means is he support Mike Flynn’s attempts to go up to Congress and be very clear with everything that they ask and what they want.
Q    Right.  But he could have just said “and testify.”  He said he should be immunity.
MR. SPICER:  Right., 
Q    And I’m asking you because it’s an important -- 
MR. SPICER:  It is.
Q    Every lawyer who works on this tells you it’s extremely important to seek it and then obtain it.  And there’s only one way you can seek it, by it being granted either by the FBI or by Congress.  And for the President of the United States to even lightly indicate that he is in favor of that it seems to is a significant development.  And I’m trying to find out if that's what the President was trying to accomplish.
MR. SPICER:  And I think what -- and I’m trying to answer the question, which is that I think that what -- not that I think -- I’ve talked to the President about this.  I think what he -- 
Q    You have? 
MR. SPICER:  Yes.  And the President is very clear that he wants Mike Flynn to go and be completely open and transparent with the committee.  And whatever it takes to do that, he is supportive of.
Q    Even if he doesn't obtain immunity?
MR. SPICER:  He wants him to -- again, I want to be clear, he wants him to do what is necessary to go up there and talk to the committees of jurisdiction to get this matter behind us.
Q    And since you've talked to the President about this, he was not trying to suggest to the FBI or the Justice Department that it grant immunity to Mike Flynn?
MR. SPICER:  No, I think he was -- I’m not entirely sure of the process -- whether the Congress does it, or DOJ, or both in this case.  But the point that -- 
Q    -- any other venue -- 
MR. SPICER:  I get it, but the -- 
Q    It would be different.
MR. SPICER:  Right, I understand.  Right.  But the bottom line is -- 
Q    He’s not instructing his Justice Department to do this?
MR. SPICER:  No, what he is instructing is Mike Flynn to do everything he can to cooperate with the committees that he’s asked to look into this.
Zeke.
Q    You talked about -- one more thing.  You said Congressman Schiff is coming over here, the Senate Intelligence --
MR. SPICER:  And let me just be clear because I know -- before you continue, I just want to be crystal clear.  I know that he’s communicated.  Our expectation is -- I don't -- 
Q    He said he was -- 
Q    He put out a press release.
MR. SPICER:  Well, there we go.  Thank you, Zeke.
Q    You just cleared up a lot of -- 
MR. SPICER:  I know.  But sometimes you -- 
Q    The Senate Intelligence Committee put out a statement yesterday that I just want to read to you -- or part of it.  
MR. SPICER:  Yes.
Q    The committee has asked the White House to direct the agencies that own the intelligence documents in question to immediately provide them directly to the committee.  Does the White House have any problem with that, or believe they're -- 
MR. SPICER:  I think we're looking into that.  I think obviously we would have hoped that, like Congressman Schiff, they would come and see these documents.
I don't know.  I know that the counsel’s office is in contact with them with respect to that.
Q    Do you see any problem with this procedure?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not -- Major, respectfully, the counsel’s office is working with them.  I don't want to get in front of what the -- how they go back and forth and make a decision on that.
Q    It’s not an illegitimate request.
Q    Schiff is asking the same thing, too?  
Q    Is this an illegitimate request?  That's all I’m trying to figure out.
MR. SPICER:  I don't know.  I don't know.  It’s not -- I think -- I want to say the goal would be -- 
Q    -- you said we don't know who owns it.  
MR. SPICER:  Again, I’m letting -- the White House Counsel’s Office sent that letter.  They are the ones whom those individuals have been in contact with.  Obviously, we’d like them to come see that information, which is what we think would help them further their review of this situation.  
Q    (Inaudible.)  
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  But what I’m telling you is it’s not my decision, Major.  This is a discussion that is occurring between both of those committees and the White House Counsel’s Office.
Q    I’m just asking, as the representative of the President, because it is his decision -- 
MR. SPICER:  I understand that.  And as you're telling me, it’s happening in real time -- the Schiff piece of it happening in real time.  I don't know the answer because it’s happening while we're here.  So I don't have an answer for us on that.
The White House Counsel’s Office is in communication with the committee, in particular, and with Congressman Schiff’s office about arranging how that would go down.  I don't know what further discussions they've had since we've been out here.
Q    So really quick just to follow up.  You said that the U.S. is giving up $2.8 billion a year in countervailing -- 
MR. SPICER:  Right. 
Q    Peter Navarro was up here last night and said that sum applied to a 16-year period.  I was hoping you could clarify the facts on that. 
MR. SPICER:  I don't -- I’ll ask Peter to -- 
Q    Peter Navarro had it as a far smaller sum over a larger --
MR. SPICER:  Right, I’ll have to ask Peter to -- 
Q    Thanks.  The second thing, follow-up on Alexis’s question.  You’ve made some serious allegations about civil liberties and potentially mishandling of classified information.  Why wouldn’t the White House, if it believed -- hand it over to the federal agency tasked with investigating crimes -- 
MR. SPICER:  Again, I’m not -- that's not -- because I think -- first of all, I don't know what we will or will not do going forward, and I don't want to prejudge that.  What I do know is that the House and Senate Intelligence Committees are both the committees that we -- the President had asked on that Sunday a few weeks ago to look into this.  And I think that's who is conducting and who’ve we'd asked to look into it.  And that's appropriate.  And I’m not aware that anyone else asked us for that information.
Q    And one final one.  Earlier in the briefing you said we don't track every -- we don't track every person who is on the 18 acres -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, no, he asked about whether or not the Chief of Staff knew everyone who was on the 18 acres.  That's what he asked. 
Q    So -- but when it comes to that, do you have any information about how the Chairman did get onto the campus, who WAVEd him in?  
MR. SPICER:  As I said over the last few days, I’m not going to discuss -- 
Q    Will you release -- sorry, the WAVES records?
MR. SPICER:  Yes, I think all of that is going to happen as soon as -- there will be a discussion about a lot of in the briefing that's going to talk about the financial disclosure forms and such as immediately as this concludes.  
Part of that.  So with that, thank you, guys, very much.  So we're going to get onto the next briefing.  Thank you very much.
END   
Press Briefing by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 4/3/2017, #34
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
2:37 P.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Welcome back.  Got a busy week ahead of us.  Before I get started, I want to just give you a quick update on something I know in the past there's been several questions about the President donating his salary to charity.  I got an update for you on that.
To that end, the President has spoken with Counsel and made the decision to donate his first-quarter salary, in total, to a government entity, and he has chosen this quarter to donate it to the National Park Service.  The Park Service has cared for our parks since 1916, and the President is personally proud to contribute the first quarter of his salary to the important mission of the Park Service, which is preserving our country's national security.
So it is my pleasure, on behalf of the President of the United States, to present a check for $78,333 to the Secretary of the Interior, Ryan Zinke, and Superintendent of the Harper's Ferry Park site, Superintendent Brandyburg.
Q    After taxes?
MR. SPICER:  No, it's straight up.  It is every penny that the President received from the first quarter since the day he was --
Q    But it's not a full quarter.  
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, right, because the Constitution says that -- (laughter) -- sorry, that was -- so it's from January 20th, noon, forward.
SECRETARY ZINKE:  We think it will cash, though.  (Laughter.)  
MR. SPICER:  With that, I'm going to let Secretary Zinke make a few comments about the Department of Interior and the work that they're doing.
SECRETARY ZINKE:  Well, thanks.  I'm Secretary Zinke, from the Department of Interior, for those who don’t know me.  Obviously, great to be with you.  Those who don’t know, I get my inspiration from Teddy Roosevelt.  And the motto now in the Department of Interior, if you go to Yellowstone and you have the opportunity to look at the Roosevelt Arch, it says, inscribed in stone is: "For the benefit and enjoyment of the people."  And that's our pledge.  
So for those who aren’t familiar with the Department of Interior, we span 12 time zones, from the Virgin Islands, all the way to Palau.  And within our holdings are 20 percent of the nation's land.  We have 417 national parks, we have 562 federally recognized Indian nations, 567 wildlife refuges, and 221 wilderness areas.  And I'm the steward of our nation's finest and most majestic holdings.
After riding on a horse on my first day -- we were pretty busy -- just on public lands alone, I signed directions, on the first day, to expand public access -- important if you're in the West, especially in the far West, as Montana is.  We've made sure we increased opportunities for traditional hunting, fishing, and conservation efforts.  And we've invested millions across 12 states on preserving our conservation efforts there.
On energy, much of last week was spent on energy.  We held one of our most successful leases -- 122,000 acres for wind development on federal lands, off Kitty Hawk, North Carolina.  We also stopped the war on coal by continuing a coal leasing program.  And I established an oversight committee to review and analyze across the board rents, royalties on our federal lands, with the objective of, number one, being transparent; number two, being Reagan -- trust, but verify; and number three, making sure the taxpayers that own the public lands are getting fair value.
On the management side, we have unfortunately uncovered a lot of internal controls that weren’t there.  There's been in the news several incidents of sexual harassment and a culture of discrimination.  And you can hear it from me -- I put policies forth -- zero tolerance for sexual harassment or discrimination.  We have 70,000 full-time employees, and each employee deserves the right to enter a workplace that's innovative, teamwork, but free from harassment.
On the brighter side, we will pilot the first-ever dog-friendly Department of Interior.  Puppy Day is coming up, so we've established that.  And people ask, why are you doing that?  Well, in some way we compete on millennials.  So we're trying to develop ourselves as a friendly department that's going to work with people, who are going to be an advocate for collaboration.  And in doing that, we're going to start with being dog-friendly.  And also, we've taken to Twitter.  As you know, this administration is Twitter-friendly, and so am I -- @SecretaryZinke.  (Laughter.)  
And finally, as a veteran myself, I tell you, I am thrilled at the President's decision to donate the check he did today.  I did talk to the President last night, and he has decided, as you know, to donate his entire quarter salary.  And we're going to dedicate it and put it against the infrastructure on our nation's battlefields.  We're about $100 [million] or $229 million behind in deferred maintenance on our battlefields alone, and that's on our 25 national battlefields.  And we're excited about that opportunity.
So thank you very much for the opportunity to be with you, and thank you for -- the American people to trust the stewardship of our nation's greatest holdings with us.
So I'd like to thank our Superintendent Brandyburg for being here.  He's Harper's Ferry.  If you haven’t been out there, please do.
With that, I'll turn it back to Sean and I will take questions.
Q    How is that war on coal been working there?  You're saying that you're going to open it up because of the war on coal.  Isn’t that kind of contrary to what Teddy Roosevelt wanted and preserving land?
SECRETARY ZINKE:  Well, there's no doubt -- three things.  One is, environmentally it's better to produce energy here under reasonable regulation than watch it get produced overseas with none.  Secondly, jobs matter.  There's a social cost of not having a job.  In some communities, coal mining, forestry are the only jobs.  And you can take it from the Crow Nation in Montana, which I'm familiar with.  Chairman Old Coyote -- the chairman once said, a war on coal is a war on Crow Nation, and coal jobs are the only jobs.  
And lastly, national security.  It is, from a SEAL perspective, it is better to make sure we're not held hostage on our energy needs in this country.  And like you, I don’t want my kids -- sons and daughters -- to have to fight for war or energy resources we have here.  So national security is critical in our energy picture.  And look, the world is safer when America is stronger, and America stronger is not being dependent on foreign services for energy.  We can do it here right, and we will.  I'm the steward, and certainly we're not going to sell or transfer public land.  And I don’t pick winners and losers.  
So coal isn’t getting any more of a better deal than anything else.  We'll let the market play.  But I want to make sure that what we do is cost-effective and it produces reliable, abundant, and affordable energy.
Q    But I think, to the point, are you going to return the land to its original, pristine value when you're done?
SECRETARY ZINKE:  I'm a Boy Scout.  So I was taught long ago that when you leave a campground, you leave it in the same or better condition than you found it.  And that's why we're looking at royalties to make sure we have a reclamation program that makes sense.  All of us want clean air, clean water.  And I'm concerned, as well as you are, to make sure what we're doing is in the best interest of the public in perpetuity.
Last question.  
Q    Have you thought about re-designating the Gold Butte Monument in Nevada?  
SECRETARY ZINKE:  We are looking at everything across the board.  When I came in, there was a lot of talk about different monuments in different places, and I talked to the senators.  And so everything is on the board, looking at it.  No monument in specific, but looking at the process, looking at the law, making sure that the monuments follow the law.  And at the end of the day, it's important that we operate collaboratively.  
If you're outside of Washington, D.C., there's a lot of anger out there.  And I want the Department of Interior, our rangers and land managers, to be first viewed as rangers and land managers, not law enforcement.  I don’t want us to be heavy-handed.  And I want us to work with local communities, because that's where we're embedded.  Our rangers, they have children, they play soccer, they coach, they do all those things -- I want to make sure the Department of Interior is the department that works with local communities, works with the states, and we want to be the "yep" team; that means be an advocate rather than an adversary. 
Thanks.  We'll come back.
MR. SPICER:  Okay.  I know it's already been a full first day back, but I want to run down a couple of quick things that happened over the weekend.  We're fortunate to be championing many great causes during the month of April that are near and dear to the White House.  We released several proclamations on Friday that are available at White House.gov.
This morning, specifically, the President proclaimed April 2nd through the 8th as National Crime Victims' Rights Week.  
On Saturday, the President declared a major disaster in the state of California as a result of severe winter storm flooding and mudslides in February.  Federal assistance will be supplementing recovery efforts in the area moving forward.  
Also on Saturday, the Vice President traveled to Columbus, Ohio to discuss American jobs and the economy.  He spoke with business leaders at DynaLab, an American-owned and operated electronic manufacturing services company.  The Vice President told the crowd that the actions that the President has already taken to create jobs in this country make it easier to do business, from taking a serious look at the regulatory process to ushering in a new era of American energy.  
With respect to today, the President, as you know, welcomed President Al-Sisi of Egypt to the White House this morning.  The two Presidents had an honest discussion focused on areas of cooperation.  The President made clear that this is a new day in the relationship between Egypt and the United States, and the President affirmed his strong support of the Egyptian people.  It was a candid dialogue during which they discussed both areas of cooperation and of concern.
Also this morning, the White House released the official portrait of the First Lady, which is similarly available on White House.gov.
And just about now, the President began a meeting with Secretary of State Tillerson, where they’re expected to discuss several topics, including the Secretary’s recent trip to Brussels where he attended the NATO foreign ministers meeting.
As you may have known, just prior to the briefing the Senate Judiciary Committee voted to advance the President’s selection for Neil Gorsuch to the full Senate.  While the White House was pleased that beyond the committee partisan vote, more Democrats have moved passed partisan obstruction to acknowledge that Judge Gorsuch is simply qualified and deserving to be on the bench, but we're obviously disappointed that the overwhelming majority of them are still playing politics with the nation’s highest court.  If the Democrats get their way -- and I know the numbers are looking that way -- this is going to be the first successful filibuster of a nominee to join the Supreme Court, which is clearly unprecedented.  
With a vote on Judge Gorsuch expected Friday, the American people will see which senators are willing to keep this seat open to get in the way of President Trump making progress on one of his most significant choices so far.
Also, today opens the application process for this year’s H1B visas.  The President has spoken about the H1B visa program in the past.  The White House acknowledges that there are issues with the program as it currently stands; however, there are several laws that are on the books that went unenforced in the previous administration.  As the Department of Justice made clear and was released this morning, the Trump administration will be enforcing laws protecting American workers from discriminating hiring practices.
Looking ahead to the schedule for the rest of the week, the President will host a CEO town hall meeting on the business climate tomorrow morning.  And then in the afternoon, he'll make remarks to the 2017 North America's Building Trades Union National Legislative Conference.  
On Wednesday, as I mentioned last week, he will host His Majesty King Abdullah II of Jordan.  And on Thursday, after welcoming participants of the Wounded Warrior Project, Soldier Ride, the President will depart for a visit with President Xi of China to Mar-a-Lago.  
The President has been briefed on the devastating flooding that has killed several hundred people in Colombia, and we are working closely with the governments of both Colombia and Peru to support efforts to address the extensive losses and damage caused by this natural disaster.  
The President has also been briefed on today’s attacks in the St. Petersburg metro.  The United States condemns this reprehensible attack and act of violence.  Our thoughts and prayers are with the injured and with the Russian people as we extend our deepest condolences to the loved ones who have been killed and injured.
Attacks like these on ordinary citizens just going about their lives remind us that the world must work as one to combat violence in all forms.  The United States is prepared to offer assistance to Russia that it may require in investigating this crime.  
And with that, I'll be glad to take your questions.
Cecilia.
Q    Thanks.  A couple questions on the same topic.  Jared Kushner’s trip to Iraq today -- why is he there and not the Secretary of State?  What is the message that the President is sending by having Jared Kushner be the one to take this trip?
MR. SPICER:  I don't think -- it's not a binary choice.  In this particular case, both Jared Kushner and Tom Bossert, the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security, are on the trip at the request and invitation of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who was going there and believed it was an opportunity for both of them.  It's, ironically, the first trip for both Mr. Kushner and Mr. Bossert.  
They’re going to receive briefings and updates with respect to what’s going on on the ground, our military involvement there, and our efforts to defeat ISIS.  Jared is going to specifically express the commitment of U.S. -- of the United States to the government of Iraq, meet with U.S. personnel engaged in the campaign.  And Mr. Bossert will participate in meetings and briefings to reinforce the strong U.S.-Iraqi partnership to defeat ISIS.
But it's not like this is a one-shot deal.  In the course of conversation and extensive meetings, that invitation was extended and they took it up.
Q    His portfolio is jam-packed.  It has grown in recent weeks.  Among the things that is our understanding that are in his portfolio is to broker Middle East peace and overhaul the federal government.  Can he do all of these things?
MR. SPICER:  I think -- not to -- it's not like he does -- he has a team that he oversees, and I think there’s a lot of areas that he has been working very diligently on behalf of the government, on behalf of the President’s agenda.  So going over and getting a firsthand understanding of the work that's being done -- to thank the government of Iraq, to see some of the sacrifice and progress that our team is making on the U.S. side -- is an opportunity that I think every government official and every member of the media should, frankly, take advantage of if offered that opportunity.
Matt.
Q    A recent ProPublica report out today revealed that President Trump can draw money from his businesses at any time without disclosing it.  So on that, I have two questions.  One, has the President withdrawn any money from his businesses since taking office?  And two, can the White House commit that the President will disclose future withdrawals if they take place?
MR. SPICER:  I'm not sure what he’s withdrawn.  I think that -- I'm somewhat surprised in the sense that anyone would find it shocking.  A blind trust, or any kind of trust, rather, the whole entire point of setting it up is that somebody can withdraw money.  And that's, frankly, part of the point of setting it up.
Q    Then why was this change not made -- it was made after -- (inaudible) -- 
MR. SPICER:  No, no, I do -- but again, I think that you just went and started to say “this change was made.”  I'm not aware that there was any change.  Just because a left-wing blog makes the point of something changing doesn’t mean it actually happened.  I'm not aware that there was ever a change in the trust.  And the idea that the President is withdrawing money at some point is exactly the purpose of what the trust -- why a trust is set up regardless of an individual.
Q    So just last question on this.  So you’re not saying whether or not it has changed?  Just to clarify, you’re not sure whether this was --
MR. SPICER:  No, no.  I’m actually -- to the best of my knowledge, it hasn’t changed.
Olivier. 
Q    I got a couple for you.  One, there are multiple reports that the administration is looking at arms packages for Taiwan, including missile defense and fighter jets.  Can you confirm or clarify?
MR. SPICER:  No.  I’m not going to discuss.
Q    Okay.  And then, last August, the President sharply criticized then-President Obama for not making more of a public case for human rights throughout the Muslim world -- throughout the Arab world.  You guys have now said that it’s better to raise those issues privately; I’m trying to understand the evolution of the thinking there.  What changed his mind?
MR. SPICER:  What changed --
Q    The President's mind.  
MR. SPICER:  I think the President recognizes that those are conversations where we can -- as I said in the statement -- that there are areas of -- that we can work with in cooperation and concern.  And that’s best discussed privately in terms of how we address areas that need to be discussed like that in order to make progress on them.  I don’t think that should be a huge surprise.
Q    Did he raise them in this meeting, do you know?
MR. SPICER:  Again, I’m not going to get into what they discussed privately, but I will tell you that we understand the concern, and I think those are the kind of things that I believe progress is made privately.
Sarah.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  I have two.  One, has President Trump spoken with President Vladimir Putin about the terror attack in Russia?
MR. SPICER:  Not yet.  I know that obviously the President of Egypt just left moments ago, prior to me coming out.  But I do know that, as I mentioned at the top, our teams have been reaching out to both the government of Russia, the government of Colombia -- and I know that there has been some outreach, I believe, to the folks -- the government of Peru with respect to their situation, the mudslides there.  
And then obviously, the violence that occurred in Russia is something that we’ve already started reaching out from a government-to-government standpoint.  If there is a call, we will make sure that we read that out.
Q    Okay.  And secondly, Senator Rand Paul has called the reports that Susan Rice ordered the unmasking of President Trump’s associates a “smoking gun.”  Does the President agree with that characterization?  And what does he think of these reports?
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, I saw Senator Paul’s tweet.  Look, I think -- I want to make sure I’m clear and consistent.  I think we’ve been trying to say that, from the get-go, that there’s been an ongoing investigation that we have supported.  
Looking into this matter, I will say that we have continued to say that I think there is a troubling direction that some of this is going in, but we’re going to let this review go on before we jump to it.  But I think that it is interesting the level of -- or the lack of interest that I've seen in these developments when it goes in one direction versus where I think it was going -- where other amounts of interest that have come from this room and beyond.  I am somewhat surprised in terms of the level of interest that I've seen from the press corps at one set of developments versus another set of developments.
That being said, I’m not going to start getting into a further discussion of that.
Blake.
Q    Sean, thanks.  Let me pick up here.  A couple questions, but I’ll start here.  Does the White House believe Susan Rice may have done anything illegal?
MR. SPICER:  I think -- I’m not going to -- appreciate the effort there.  I’m not going to start going down that road.  As we’ve said before, we go down one road, we need to go down them all.  And I think at this point, we have supported this review that we’ve asked for.  
But I do think that when you see the developments that we’ve seen in terms of the public, on-the-record comments that Dr. Farkas -- Evelyn Farkas, who is the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Defense for Russian Affairs, said very publicly that this was part of an attempt of the Obama administration to spread classified information, and then you see the developments that have happened today, I would just say that as, again, I’m -- somewhat more from a media standpoint -- somewhat intrigued by the lack of interest that we’ve seen in some of these public revelations in reporting that has gone in that direction that we’ve seen in some of the other directions that we’ve seen.
That being said, I’m not going to get into --
Q    So let me ask you, as it relates to Neil Gorsuch, is the White House comfortable with the nuclear option potentially being invoked?
MR. SPICER:  The President said several weeks ago that this was something that he would support.  We’re comfortable in the sense that obviously that decision is up to Leader McConnell to make how he wants the Senate to deal with this.  I think the Majority Leader’s comments are very clear in the direction that he’s heading in.  
But I think this is -- we have entered a whole new league if this goes forward in terms of Democrats really going and saying -- it’s one thing to vote against the nominee; we’ve seen that in the past, and I understand that.  But we’ve now gone from the devolution of agreeing that there are certain people that a President has the right -- as long as they’re qualified, right?  We’ve seen that in the past; John Roberts, I think, got 78 votes.  
But when you see that going one direction, versus now that there’s literally going to be the first filibuster in modern times on a qualified judge that going to end up going on the court, we have really come a long way.  And I think Democrats are setting a very dangerous precedent when it comes to how they want to do this.  Because this isn’t about voting against somebody or having an issue with them.  It is literally trying to stop -- using the filibuster for something that it was never intended for.  Nor has it ever really been the principle that we would vote down someone who was qualified.
Trey.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  What is President Trump doing behind the scenes to make sure that his pick for the Supreme Court, Judge Neil Gorsuch, ultimately is confirmed by the Senate?  And what message does he have for Democrats on Capitol Hill who have said they’re going to filibuster?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I mean, if you look at -- I think it’s four Democrats that are now supporting, saying that they’re going to vote against the filibuster.  I think we feel good about that level of support.
We’ve, I think, done a very good job of making sure that we have the Republican majority support that we need to pass it.  It is now an internal question for senators to determine how they want to do it.  But make no mistake -- and I believe Leader McConnell when he says, on Friday, Judge Gorsuch will be voted as the next Supreme Court Justice.
Q    Can you just take me through what Friday looks like for the President?  Obviously, a major meeting with the President of China, but his eyes are going to be here on Washington.  Is he going to making phone calls Thursday night trying to gauge the situation?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think he’s going to be -- we look forward to heading down to Florida Thursday to engage in some bilateral and -- bilateral-plus meetings -- meetings with the President and his team from China.  Obviously, that will continue into Friday morning.  But we’ll see how Friday evolves.
But again, I’m not -- I don’t think there’s any question right now, according to Leader McConnell and others, that we’re going to have an associate justice of the Supreme Court ready to go.  It’s a question of how it happens.
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Just a couple questions about the check presentation earlier in the briefing.  You mentioned that, when he decided to give the money to the Park Service and had the advice of counsel.  Is there going to be an issue with him making a donation to a non-profit?
MR. SPICER:  I think there was just -- that when given the options, he decided that there was a list of government entities that can accept donations.  Ironically, it’s not as easy to give money to the government as you would think -- aside from the IRS.  (Laughter.)  And then, I don’t think you're giving.
But my point is, is that he looked through a variety, and for this quarter he chose the National Park Service.  But it was a decision that he made based on -- his counsel presented him with several options, and he believed that -- as Secretary Zinke pointed out -- that there was some great work being done there, especially that needed to do to restore our great battlegrounds, and wanted to do his --
Q    Speaking of giving money to the federal government, the President has been -- going to Mar-a-Lago again this weekend -- has been facing calls from both officials in New York and in Florida either to appropriate federal funds or request federal funds, which were not in the budget for the additional security burdens that they have faced, given his residence there, travels to those places, or to reimburse those local governments out of his own pocket.  Obviously, this President is far wealthier than any President we’ve seen in modern times, and he has the capability to make those outlays.  Is that something the President is considering, or has he decided to make those outlays to reimburse the --
MR. SPICER:  I think there’s a few things.  Number one, the request to go to Mar-a-Lago was something that was negotiated with the Chinese.  And so I think this is a very high-level visit that really has a huge impact on both economic and national security.  
Secondly, the President has an opportunity, as all Presidents -- President Bush traveled to Crawford; President Obama went to Hawaii often -- this is not something that you can control.  There is a security aspect that the Secret Service determines when the President and the family travels.  That’s not dictated by the President of the United States.
And third, I would note, ironically, this is a day that the President just donated a significant amount of money of his salary back to the federal government.  And so respectfully, it’s like -- at what point does he do enough?  He just gave a very sizable donation --
Q    (Inaudible), though, that’s a very small --
MR. SPICER:  But that’s not how we judge -- I think to be able to say that -- he isn’t taking a salary, I think he’s stepped down from his business.  He’s walked away from a lot.  I think at some point he’s done quite a bit in terms of handing -- making a donation to the government.
John.
Q    Sean, back on Susan Rice, if I could.  The fact that it’s allegedly the former national security advisor who requested the unmasking when it came to the incidental collection of people who were associated with the Trump campaign and the Trump transition puts that now squarely in the White House.  When you look at that, combine it with the NSC rules that were promulgated at the end of the Obama administration to more broadly share intelligence, does this White House look at what she allegedly requested as a national security issue or a political issue?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I’m not going to -- that’s a nice backdoor into a line of questioning.  I think until there’s a finding of that, I don’t want to start getting into the motives, because we still have a -- again, me getting to the motives assumes certain things in fact that I don’t think we’re ready to go to yet, because that, again, would be getting in the middle of an investigation.
I do think that there’s been enough public discussion and reporting on this stuff that I’m not going to comment on this any further until those committees have come to a conclusion of that sort.  So we’re not going to start going down -- guessing the motives of something that is not assumed in fact yet.  But I do think that it is interesting, as I mentioned earlier, the level or lack thereof of interest in this subject versus what has been commented on previously in terms of alleged people involved and processes.
So I think there is -- Margaret.  
Q    Sean, you mentioned that Jared Kushner has a team working with him.  Can you help us understand exactly what’s in the portfolio and who’s on the team?  And I have a follow to that.
MR. SPICER:  Yeah, he’s announced the Office of American Innovation the other day.  We named a bunch of those folks that have been part of that team.  And as you looked at various aspects of government, he works with different people in the White House that oversee different parts of that portfolio, whether it’s part of the team that’s doing the Middle East was one thing; you’ve got Jason Greenblatt, who’s been traveling to the Middle East and other places to do that.  There’s people like Reed Cordish and Chris Liddell that are part of the team that are talking about the Office of American Innovation that he discussed last week with respect to opioid use and others.
So there is a team, depending on the subject, that is working with him, and he is providing oversight and direction.
Q    So he’s overseeing teams handling all these different issues -- whether it’s Mexico, Canada, Israel, Palestine, Iraq, Saudi, all of that.
MR. SPICER:  Sure.  Well, again, remember, on Iraq, don’t go too far there.  He was invited by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as was Tom Bossert, the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security, to see the work that’s being done there firsthand.  I don’t think to sort of then translate it into “he’s overseeing Iraq” is an accurate assessment.  
He was invited to go see something by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and he’s doing it.
Q    But my follow on that is -- I appreciate how he’s in such a unique position and so trusted by the President, but there are people who could look at the situation and say, the White House isn’t meant to be run as a family business.  There are institutions with experienced diplomats who have years of decades of linguistic and experience on the ground.  Why --
MR. SPICER:  But with respect to that -- 
Q    -- with whatever these issues are, the foreign policy issues in particular, that you laid out.  
MR. SPICER:   But you just said -- right.  Can you just be clear, though, because you just said “with years of linguistic experience.”  So what situation are you specifically referring to?
Q    That’s partly why I was asking exactly what’s in the portfolio.  Because it’s our understanding that Mr. Kushner is involved with Mexico, that he’s involved with Saudi Arabia, that he’s involved with Canada, that he’s involved with a number of different issues -- China, in particular.
MR. SPICER:  I think that there has been, as he has made clear -- initially, during the transition, he played a very key role in helping facilitate a lot of those.  But now that his State Department is up and running he has started to push a lot of those.  But there’s obviously people that are going to continue --
Q    He's pushing those to the State Department?   
MR. SPICER:  Absolutely.  But there’s a lot of relationships that Jared has made over time with different leaders -- Mexico being one of them you mentioned -- that are going to continue to have conversations with him and help facilitate.  That doesn’t mean by any means that it’s being done without coordination with the State Department; quite, in fact, the opposite.
He continues to work with them and to facilitate an outcome, but he brings a perspective to this and began doing that during the transition.  But again, it’s not a binary choice where it’s -- he’s doing this at the expense of somebody else.
Q    So he has a direct line to the President, whereas the other institutions are not.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, great, that’s even better then.  I think that’s a win for our government.
Shannon.
Q    On healthcare, has the President been reaching out, or anyone in the administration, to Democrats in Congress?  Can you say specifically who?  And does he still see the opportunity to work more closely with Democrats given the difficulties with the House Freedom Caucus?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President has made clear that he intends to work with anyone who wants to help him get to the number of votes.  He obviously has had a very productive discussion this weekend with Senator Paul.  I know the Vice President has been actively engaged, as well as other members of the staff, with members of the House in particular.  And they’re going to continue to try to find a way forward.
But there are some -- I’m not going to expose every member that’s had some of these -- some of them will want to backchannel this to offer solutions and constructive ways forward.  But those conversations are happening at several levels within the White House to see if we can find a way forward to get the number of requisite votes.  
But the President continues to work hard.  He’s having these conversations.  Members have reached out to him to make their suggestions known.  And so that’s -- but we continue to feel optimistic in the sense that there’s a lot of constructive ideas that are coming to the table to get us to a way forward on healthcare.
I just want to make one admin announcement.  Tomorrow, the President is -- as I mentioned, he’s giving a speech tomorrow with a roundtable of CEOs on the American workforce.  And then tomorrow he’ll be speaking again at the American National Building Trades union.  So we’ll have some kind of background briefing before the day because he is speaking live.  So we will, on the guidance tomorrow, have something for you in terms of what we’ll do for a briefing.  We’re working on that now.
With that, I’m going to end for today and let you guys have a good one.  Take care.  Thank you, guys.    
END 
Press Gaggle by Press Secretary Sean Spicer, 4/4/2017
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
11:45 A.M. EDT
MR. SPICER:  I know the President is leaving shortly, so I'm going to keep this relatively short. 
A couple things from yesterday.  The President signed four bills:  S.J. Res. 34 which disapproves of the FCC regulations that would have imposed new privacy standards on Internet service providers, allowing bureaucrats in Washington to pick winners and losers in the industry -- we've discussed that before; H.J Resolution 83, which disapproves of a Department of Labor regulation extending the statute of limitation for claims against employers failing to maintain records of employee injuries; H.J. Res. 69, the disapproval of the Bureau of Land Management regulations that would limit Alaska’s ability to manage hunting of predators on national wildlife refuges in Alaska; and H.R. 1228 which makes technical amendments to the appointment procedures of members to the Board of Congressional Compliance.
One quick note, I mentioned this before, but the number gets higher -- we’ve now -- the President has signed 12 congressional review acts.  In the past, all Presidents combined had signed one.  So I think we have a vastly different attempt to roll back regulatory reforms that are standing in the way of freedom as well as business development.
Also yesterday, the President spoke with the President of Peru and the President of Colombia to express his condolences for the devastation and loss of life by recent mudslides in the country.  He offered the assistance of the United States government during this tragedy.  And the President also spoke with President Putin of the Russian Federation to condemn yesterday’s attack in St. Petersburg.  He offered the full support of the United States government in responding to the attack and bringing those to justice.  We had readouts of both of those yesterday.
With respect to today, this morning the President hosted a CEO town hall.  I think some of you had the opportunity to go over there.  The town hall was broken into four separate discussions -- infrastructure, modernizing government services, workforce development, and the pro-business climate.  A report released by the Pew Research Center yesterday showed an historic rise in public opinion about the economy.  Fifty-eight percent of Americans say that the current economic situation in the United States is good, which is a 14 percent jump from last year, the largest one-year improvement in the survey’s history.  It’s also the most positive Americans have been about the economy since before the recession.  
The American economy is already showing improvements under the President’s pro-job, pro-business policies.  The President was glad for the opportunity to speak to the CEOs from many industries about what his administration is doing moving forward to make it even easier to create jobs in America and making it even easier to do business in the country.
This afternoon -- in fact, literally momentarily -- the President will be taking off from the White House to go speak at the 2017 North America Building Trades Unions national legislative conference.  I’m not going to get ahead of the speech, but I think it’s fairly safe to say that he looks forward to speaking to the men and women who are building so much around our nation, and the issues that matter most to them -- bringing back well-paying jobs, jumpstarting American energy, rebuilding our infrastructure and trade.
Later this afternoon, the President will have several meetings, including EPA Administrator Pruitt, Treasury Secretary Mnuchin, Congressman Dana Rohrabacher, Governor Torres of the Northern Mariana Islands.  And this afternoon, we will have a background briefing here in this room at 4:30 p.m. on the upcoming visit with President Xi.  
And then tomorrow, I know we had mentioned earlier in the week that there will be a Wounded Warriors soldier ride.  We’re obviously tracking the weather on that, but this is really a great opportunity, and I know that this team is working with several media outlets who want to cover this to really pay tribute to the men and women who have fought and served for this country and some of the efforts that are being made now to really go out and show how they’ve recovered so well and compete.  So while it may look like we’re going to have some rain, I’ll make sure that we share any updates with you.  
Last, before I get on to your questions, I just want to -- we have a quick update on Syria.  So I'm going to read the statement for you, and obviously, as I conclude, we will put it out:  
Today’s chemical attack in Syria against innocent people, including women and children, is reprehensible and cannot be ignored by the civilized world.  These heinous actions by the Bashar al-Assad regime are a consequence of the past administration’s weakness and irresolution.  President Obama said in 2012 that he would establish a “red line” against the use of chemical weapons, and then did nothing.  The United States stands with our allies across the globe to condemn this intolerable act.  
John.
Q    Thank you, Sean.  I wanted to pick up on that statement.  As you know, with this chemical attack on this rebel-held Syrian town, at least 100 deaths have been reported, at least 400 injuries.  And I hope you could give some clarity in terms of the administration's position on Syria.  Secretary of State Tillerson just days ago said that the Syrian people themselves should decide the future of the country.  And at the same time, the U.N. Ambassador -- the U.S. Ambassador to the U.N., Nikki Haley, has said that Assad is a war criminal.  So you just criticized President Obama's policy on Syria and the red line.  What will the administration do in response to what we saw take place there over the past 24 hours?
MR. SPICER:  Thanks.  I think the statement speaks for itself.  I think a couple of things.  One is, statements by both Secretary Tillerson and Ambassador Haley speak to the political realities of the situation in Syria in terms of -- I think we had opportunities in the past, several years, to look at regime change.  I think those are fundamentally -- the landscape is fundamentally different than it is today.  
That being said, I think the President has made it clear in the past, and will reiterate that today, that he is not here to telegraph what we're going to do.  But rest assured that I think he has been speaking with his national security team this morning, and we will continue to have that discussion both internally with our national security team, as well as with our allies around the globe.  But I think the statement pretty much speaks for itself -- what we believe, that is -- and then we'll go from there.
Q    Do you think there is any confusion with those two statements that I read earlier -- one from Secretary of State Tillerson and the other from the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley?
MR. SPICER:  No.  As I said, one of them is just a statement of -- or both of their statements with respect to Assad speak to the political reality of -- it's great to say that -- there is almost an acknowledgement of the reality of the situation, politically speaking, in terms of his standing within -- where we stand.  There is not a fundamental option of regime change as there has been in the past.  I think we would look like, to some degree, rather silly not acknowledging the political realities that exist in Syria, and that what we need to do is fundamentally do what we can to empower the people of Syria to find a different way.
Right now, both statements stand very squarely with what we will do today.  I think that the comments and the statement are unequivocal when it comes to how we believe we view this attack on innocent people, the heinous nature of it.  But I don’t want to get ahead of where we're going from here.
Hunter.
Q    Just real quick, Sean.  Are you --
MR. SPICER:  Hold on.  Hans, I know --
Q    I didn’t know if the point was to me or --
MR. SPICER:  No, no, it wasn’t.  Hunter is Hunter; Hans is Hans.
Q    Thank you, Sean.
MR. SPICER:  I'll come back to you.
Q    Thank you.  I'm wondering if you're at all concerned to see these reports of the chemical attacks coming right on the heels of the administration suggesting it's open to Assad staying in power.  Are you worried there's any correlation between the attacks and the change in posture?
MR. SPICER:  Again -- and I don’t think -- I would hardly characterize it as -- I forgot the way that you phrased it -- but there's not a comfort level with Assad.  I think it's a political reality.  That being said, I think the idea that someone would use chemical weapons on their own people, including women and children, is not something that any civilized nation should sit back and accept or tolerate.  And I think that is what we are making very clear today.
Q    Right.  But in addition to you describing Assad as the 
"political reality," Ambassador Haley said the priority "is no longer to sit there and focus on getting Assad out."  That's a direct quote.  So this is clearly a change in posture.  Do you think there's any correlation between sort of an almost increased brazenness on his part and those statements? 
MR. SPICER:  I don't.  And I think that -- like I said, I'm not going to get into it, but I think the President is extremely alarmed at these revelations.  He continues to meet with his national security team, and I think there will be further discussions around the globe with our allies as far as the appropriate action.
Hans.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  Are you certain it was the Assad regime?  Is it possible that Russia was involved?  Do you know the air platform?  And then one final -- do you know if any Russian forces were with Assad regime forces that launched the chemical attack?
MR. SPICER:  I'm not going to get into -- I know that the President was briefed on this extensively this morning by his national security team, and I'm going to let the statement speak for itself, because we feel very confident in the statement that we're making.
Q    So that means no Russian involvement?
MR. SPICER:  That means that the statement is very clear as far as who we believe is to blame and how we believe we're reacting to it.
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Sean.  In the statement, you were sharply critical of the past administration with regards to Syria.  I was hoping you could clarify, when does the President believe that he takes ownership of foreign policy when obviously -- every President always blames the predecessor -- the need to put that criticism in this statement, now condemning the use of chemical weapons, a war crime overseas, why take the potshot at his predecessor?  And when does the President truly own his own foreign policy?  
MR. SPICER:  I think it is very clear.  I mean, we drew -- what's the point of red lines?  America's credibility was at stake, and I think the President wants to point out that there was a red line and they did cross it.  We did talk about -- we did have alternatives to regime change, and they weren’t taken.  And I think that's a very, very different -- it's important to acknowledge the difference in the change in our posture and how we will go out from here.  So I think it is a big difference.
Q    And what is that change in posture?
MR. SPICER:  I understand.  The statement speaks for itself.  I think I'm not going to get into what actions we're taking.  Obviously, I get you want to do that.  Those are decisions that the national security team continues to make recommendations to the President.  But until we do anything, I'd rather not get ahead of it.
Q    So the next crisis -- maybe it's not Syria -- is the President going to criticize President Obama for trade policies when he meets with President Xi later this week?  Is it every foreign policy statement --
MR. SPICER:  It's going to depend -- I mean, I don’t want to say yes or no.  I mean, I think that's going to depend on what our posture was towards that country or regime or policy.
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. SPICER:  I don’t -- I mean, I don’t know.  Did you ask that same question of President Obama when they literally spent a year or two years blaming the Bush administration for everything that was wrong?
Q    Yes.  Yes, we did.  (Laughter.)    
MR. SPICER:  But I mean, I think that -- look, right now we’re 70-something days into it.  I think there’s no question what their position was with respect to Syria in terms of red lines and regime change and the lack of action that they did take.  I think we want to make sure that we’re very clear that there is a different posture.
Q    Sean, is President Trump willing to draw a second red line to discourage the Assad regime from using chemical weapons on his own people?
MR. SPICER:  I think the statement is pretty clear on this, Trey.  The United States stands with our allies to condemn this intolerable attack.  And I think going forward we will have more on this, but I’m not -- I think we want to be very clear where we stand.  I know countries throughout Europe are reaching out, making it clear what their position is.  There’s been some calls for action, the U.N. Security Council.  I think, at this point, as things develop, I’m not ready to talk about our next step, but we’ll get there soon.
Kaitlan.
Q    Does the White House agree with Rand Paul that Susan Rice should testify?
MR. SPICER:  I think that’s -- again, I’m not going to start getting into who should testify.  But I do think that it is -- I know that she’s about to make comments to a host of -- to minimize this.  But it is interesting, she was the one who went out and said she “had nothing to do” with this on a program a few weeks ago, and now I continue to see more and more reports.
So I think it’s not for me to decide who should testify or how they should do it, but I do think that there is a sharp contrast between a few weeks ago when she was very public in saying she "didn’t have any clue what Chairman Nunes was talking about," and yet now we’re finding out that she’s trying to figure out how she can go to some kind of friendly way of discussing this.
But all yesterday there was an opportunity -- my understanding -- of several people to reach out.  I didn’t hear anything except for a quote; one network described it as a “person close to her,” which I think is rather interesting that -- you would assume that if you stood by the comments that you made several weeks ago, that you wouldn’t need someone who just was close to you to defend it.
Q    What do you think about networks like CNN saying that it’s a diversion, that the Susan Rice story is a diversion?
MR. SPICER:  I think I’ll let CNN speak for themselves.  I find it interesting that you -- I don’t know how many reports that -- I get that at some point they have an invested angle and narrative in this, but the reality is -- and again, I’m not going to keep going into every turn and twist about this, but I think that, as I noted yesterday, the more we find out about this the more we learn that there was clearly something there and that there was a lot of activity.  We’ve seen people both on the record and in comments talk about their activities.
I think it’s interesting, as I noted yesterday, and I read some of the comments afterwards, but the default from at least some media outlets seems to be to rush to the defense of the Obama administration and the activities there instead of so-called want to get to the bottom of this.  But there is an immediate attempt to defend certain actions like that on one side of the aisle and an immediate rush to judgment on the other side, which I get that people don’t like to hear that, but that is the reality.
If you look at the two situations that occurred, there is no question the way that some networks are handling one set of circumstances versus another.  It is clearly an attempt to preserve a narrative and to defend one side of the aisle versus another.
Steve.
Q    Sean, generally speaking, would you like to see Assad step down or out of power somehow in Syria?
MR. SPICER:  I think it’s in the best interest of the Syrian people to not have anybody who would do the kind of heinous acts -- any leader that treats their people with this kind of activity and death and destruction -- I mean, it’s just -- yeah, I don’t think that anybody would wish this upon anybody.
Q    And are you confident that the United States will respond to this attack in some way?
MR. SPICER:  I would not want to get ahead of the President at this point.  I do think that the statement is fairly strongly worded for a certain reason.
Q    And lastly, has he specifically talked to any allies about this this morning?
MR. SPICER:  I’m not sure that he’s spoken to any leaders specifically.  I know the team has been in contact.  He’s spent an extensive amount of [time with] team this morning getting briefed by the intelligence community as well as his national security team.
Hallie.
Q    Sean, I want to follow on that and then I have two other topics for you.  You said -- I know you don’t want to get ahead of the President and you’re letting the statement speak for itself.  You also said that you want to empower the people of Syria to find a different way.  How will the United States help them out with that?
MR. SPICER:  I don’t think -- again, we need to look at options at this point, and I’m not going to get ahead of the President and the team.  I think right now our concern is for the people of Syria and the victims of this attack.  We have plenty of time to chart a way forward.
Q    Okay, so let me just ask you this.  On the Susan Rice story, you said yesterday you believed that it was moving in a “troubling direction.”  What do you find troubling about that story?
MR. SPICER:  Well, I find it troubling that someone would go out and talk about the fact that they had -- and again, I’m paraphrasing because I don’t have the exact quote in front of me -- but I believe she made something to the comments, I have no idea what Chairman Nunes is talking about, and then threw a person apparently that’s close to her -- continuing a narrative, but yet more and more news outlets are reporting that there was something there.
And there’s a question -- I’ve seen enough -- you saw Secretary -- I mean, former director Brennan talk about that if people were leaking this information, it's treasonous.  You have questions about what was the motive behind if it didn’t have intelligence value, it wasn’t part of an ongoing investigation, what was the reason that somebody would have -- the extent to which it goes.
I think those are all very -- I mean, there is a civil liberties component to this that should be very troubling in terms of the revelations that keep coming up.
Q    But so to pick up on that, do you believe it is improper for a national security advisor to request the unmasking of names?
MR. SPICER:  It would depend on the purpose of that.  Again, it depends on the purpose of why they were asking and what they were trying to accomplish.
Q    But it sounds like you believe this purpose was politically motivated.  (Inaudible.)  
MR. SPICER:  No, no, I’m not -- please don’t --
Q    I’m not putting words in your mouth, I’m just trying to understand --
MR. SPICER:  Well, you are.  You said “you believe.”
Q    I’m asking you.
MR. SPICER:  Okay, and I think the answer is that I think why I’m saying that we’re going in a troubling path is I think that what we continue to see is that there is a lot coming out that says there was no value in this intelligence.  And so the question is, why was somebody unmasked if that was the case, what was the purpose of requesting it, and the extent of which it occurred.
If there is no intelligence or criminal value in it, why was somebody requesting it?  How far did they do it?  Who did they share it with?  But I believe that there are more questions than answers at this point.
Q    My last question about healthcare.  There’s been a lot of discussion in the last 18 hours or so on the revival, potentially, of this healthcare bill.  Speaker Paul Ryan said today it’s in the concept stages, if you will.  Can you talk about the White House’s role in this and specifics?  Are community ratings now on the table?  Preexisting conditions, will those be protected?  Has the President made that --
MR. SPICER:  I think, yesterday, Chief of Staff Priebus and some others hosted a group -- Tuesday Group folks here in the morning.  I know the Vice President and Mr. Priebus went up to Capitol Hill later in the afternoon.  I know they’ve got some additional meetings today I believe back on Capitol Hill.  They’re having some folks here.  The President had a discussion with a couple members in the House and the Senate over the weekend.  
I think that our goal is -- and I know Chairman Walden of the House Energy and Commerce Committee has been talking to his members in particular and members of the different caucuses and groups up there, and I think has some ideas that he thinks could be very helpful.  He’s talked to leadership.  I think if we can -- the same narrative that we’ve been talking about for a while -- if we can get that group to get to 216, then I think that we’ll move forward.
I think the talks have been very productive.  
Q    So it’s back live, would you say?
MR. SPICER:  I think the President -- look, the President would like to see this done.  If we can get a deal and it gets to those votes -- which, again, I'm not going to raise expectations.  But I think that there are more and more people coming to the table with more and more ideas about to grow that vote.  And I think on both -- not just in the House, but we've had some discussions as well in the Senate.  But I think both the Chief of Staff and the Vice President feel very optimistic with the tone of the conversation and the ideas that are coming out and the willingness of folks to find common ground.
John.
Q    Can you talk about this Erik Prince business -- this idea that he was trying to create a back channel between the President and Russia?  I mean, his closeness to this administration -- his sister being the Education Secretary -- certainly creates an appearance, but it could also be problematic for the White House from the standpoint of, well, this is what the Obama administration might have been looking into (inaudible) intelligence reports.
MR. SPICER:  The thing that's interesting about the story is, when you look at it, it's -- respectfully, I would call it flimsy.  I mean, they use -- the meeting took place around January 11th.  He had no “formal role with the campaign or transition team,” although he apparently presented himself.  He “has ties to people” -- that's plural.  When you go through the story, the tie that they have is that he appeared on Steve Bannon’s radio show.  When you look at the radio show, it says that he appeared on Steve Bannon’s radio show in November.  Steve Bannon gave up the radio show in August.  
I think that this idea that somebody who admittedly, on both sides -- we say that he had no role in the transition, he says he has no role in the transition.  But apparently, he knows somebody who knew somebody, who knew a guy in the UAE, who also knew a guy in Russia and they had to fly to the Seychelles on or around January 11th, of which the government of the Seychelles says, "They have no record of them being there."  Government officials in the Seychelles, “they were not aware of any meetings.”
But it is a bunch of flimsy pieces of information all tied together to create a sensational feel.  But just so we're clear, there is no -- they can't identify the other individuals.  They claim that Erik Prince, who went, admittedly by himself, by us, by others, has no role in the transition, and that his connection is “ties to people” -- is, one, he’s related to what would become the Secretary of Education’s sister, and two, is he appeared on someone’s radio show.  That doesn’t seem to pass muster with a great deal of strength to me.
Q    But would you acknowledge that this could be potentially problematic from the standpoint of --
MR. SPICER:  No.
Q    -- this could give Susan Rice an out to say, well, this was the sort of thing that we were looking at, and this is why we were conducting to unmask -- 
MR. SPICER:  Well, I think if you are looking at -- I mean, you would hope that if that's what you were looking at, you would get a lot more information than that.  That, to me -- I don't -- they don't know the date, who they met with, how they actually came into contact, what the exact ties were, or what supposedly happened as a consequence to this, because they can't meet.  There was no, apparently -- nothing came of it.  
So, again, I guess someone may have visited an island, but there is no proof they actually ever met with an individual, nor that they had any ties, nor that they actually know the exact date, nor any consequence of the so-called meeting.  I think that it is flimsy at best.  
Q    The President said earlier at that CEO town hall, as it relates to infrastructure, that the package would be a trillion dollars and “maybe even more.” Given a trillion dollars is a massive number to begin with, what might “and maybe even more” mean?
MR. SPICER:  Again, I think that's part of what the team is working on.  It's a number that's very consistent with what he has said since the beginning.  So I don't know why this should be any different than -- I mean, it's consistent with the numbers that he’s used.
Q    And then let me ask you about Dodd-Frank.  He also said that he wants to take a haircut to it.  Dodd-Frank is a law that the President can't unilaterally change.  He can't sign executive orders.  So is he hoping to work with Capitol Hill for this major haircut?  Is it solely through executive orders?  How does that relationship -- 
MR. SPICER:  I think we'll have an update further on that.  Obviously, there’s clearly, as you know, a legislative component to this, and we'll have more on that.  
Q    Thanks, Sean.  I want to follow up on Hallie's question about healthcare.  The proposed changes to the essential health benefits and the community ratings -- is there a concern that that would roll back protections for preexisting conditions?  That's obviously something that President Trump said he wanted to keep in place during the campaign.  So wouldn’t these changes that health policy experts were saying would get rid of those protections, wouldn't that violate what President Trump -- 
MR. SPICER:  Again, I would note, to Hallie’s question, that we're not there yet.  We're having discussions.  As I said, the Chief of Staff hosted the Tuesday Group yesterday morning, and then he and the Vice President went up yesterday to talk to the Freedom Caucus.  I think part of this is -- I get that there are disparate interests that are trying to pull this to one side or another, but I think that we understand the core principles of this and we've got to make sure that we do -- whatever we do continues to get an outcome that grows the vote, not decreases the vote.  And so I don't want to start prejudging where this thing is going to head at this point.  
So, with that, I know the President is on his way, he’s going to start speaking.  So I'll catch you later.  Enjoy.  Thank you.
END    